Life of Sri Vedanta Desika. 
There is no name in the world of Samskrit Literature and Philosophy combined, like the name of Sri Vedanta Desika, the reputed author of this Drama (the Sankalpa-Suryodaya). The rising growth of two great schools of Hindu religion-the Rāmānuja Darsana1 and the Madhva Darsana-characterised an epoch in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries A. D. 
It was Sri Rāmānuja who exploded the fallacy of the Maya theory of Sankara and conclusively established the true relationship of the individual to the Paramātman. The dissemination of the teachings of the Visishtādvaita Philosophy was entrusted by Sri Rāmānuja to 71 of his Apostles (Simhasanadhipatis). One such A pos- 
1. System of religio philosophy. 
s. s. i 
ii 
tle was Anantasômayaji, and his grandson was Anantasûri. Of a family of equal sanctity and repute was born Totàràmbà, the daughter of Kidambi Padmanabha, otherwise known as Sriranga Raja Pillan and the sister of Vādihamsāmbuvāha (otherwise known as Ramanuja Pillan and Appullar). Totàràmba's descent is also traceable from Kidambi Acchàn, one of the 74 Apostles. It was in the fitness of things therefore that the most welcome alliance took place between Anantasûri and Totaramba. This illustrious couple lived happily at Túppul', near Kanchi knowing nothing but service to God and God'smen. Of such parents of high lineage on both the father's and the mother's side was our author born at Tuppul', under the auspicious constellation of Sravana in the month of Kanni (Purattasi) of the year Vibhava, 1191 of the Salivahana era (September 1268 A.D.). Blest is that day even to-day for all for it is the last day of the annual festival of the Lord Srinivasa, the Resident Deity on the Holy Hills of Tirupati. The observance and consum- 
1. This is a suburb of Kanchi (Conjeevaram situated close to the shrine of Dipaprakasi. 
iii 
mation of many a vow and the conclusion of many a pilgrimage to the Holy Hills are well known, even unto this day, to every devout Hindu. 
2. The event of this birth is sung in the following verse:- 
भाद्रपदमासगतविष्णुविमल वेङ्कटमहानृपतितार्थीदिनभूते । प्रादुरभवज्जगति दैत्यरिपुघण्टा इन्त कवितार्किक मृगेन्द्रगुरुमूर्त्या ॥' 
3. Synchronously, before the birth of Vedanta Desika, there arose in the mind of the Lord of Tirupati a desire to re-establish in its pristine glory the Darsana of Sri Ramanuja. The Lord therefore resolved upon His BellAngel incarnating in the world to ring Ràmànuja's fame. The Lord, to achieve this end, commanded Anantasûri in a dream to make a pilgrimage to His Shrine, adding that He has willed to bless him with a son. In wonderment, 
1. On the concluding day of the holy festival of the Lord Venkatesa (the Lord of Tirupati), under the constellation of Sravana in the month of Kanni (September), up appeared unto the earth the Holy Bell of the Asura-enemy (Vishnu), in the person of the Preceptor-the Lion of Rhetoric and Logic. 
iv 
Anantasûri wished to communicate his miraculous dream to his wife, but she surprised him with the news that she also had a similar dream of a young married woman appearing and commanding her to go to Tirupati. The Bell in the Tirupati Temple is said to have become invisible on the night of the above dream. The Archakas (officiant-priests) were charged with the theft of it, but Providence could not allow innocent men to be punished, for the Jiar (or the chief ascetic functionary) of the temple dreamt a dream in which the God revealed that the Bell's invisibility was by His own Will and commanded that no other bell should be substituted. Even to this day no bell is used during worship inside the Tirupati shrine. The blessed Author is therefore believed to be an incarnation of the Bell of the Holy Lord of Tirupati. He himself has given expression to this belief in the 14th slôka of the I Act of this Drama. 
वित्रासिनी विबुववैरिवरूथिनीनां पद्मासनेन परिचारविधौ प्रयुक्ता । उत्प्रेक्ष्यते बुधजनैरुपपत्तिभूम्ना घण्टा हरेः समजनिष्ट यदात्मनेति ॥' 
1. For translation See page 16. 
The efficacy of the Bell in the daily worship is well expressed by the following:- 
1. घण्टानादविहीनाश्च तान्त्रिका नित्यनिष्फलाः ॥ 2. आगमार्थं तु देवानां गमनार्थे तु रक्षसाम् ॥ 3. भूताः प्रेताः पिशाचाश्च ह्यसुरा ब्रह्मराक्षसाः । 
गच्छन्ति घण्टाघोषेण पलायनपराङ्मुखाः ॥ 
4. Rapturous was the joy of Sri Appullàr (Ramanuja Pillan), the uncle of Sri Desika when he heard of this great miracle and he lost no time to see the fresh-born babe. Appropriately was the baby named Venkatanātha after Sri Venkatesa, as he was born on the marriage day of Sri Venkatesa of Tirupati and in due time were the sacramental ceremonies correctly conducted; the ceremony of the Sun-showing was celebrated on the third month, Moon-showing on the fourth month, food-showing on the fifth month, and food-feeding on the first anniversary day. On this 
1. All Tantras (rites of worship), unaccompanied with the sound of the Holy Bell are ever inefficacious. 
2. To invite the Devas and to drive away the Asuras (the bell is sounded). 
3. Goblins, Spirits, Devils, Asuras and BrahmaRakshasas, all turning their faces, run away at the sound of the Holy Bell. 
vi 
holy day, our Author-Baby's ear-boring ceremony was duly solemnised and he was taken by his uncle Appullar on the same day to the temple of Lord Varadaraja, the Resident Deity at Kanchi where the baby had the first glimpse of his Eternal Lord here and hereafter. Lord Varadaraja was delighted in no small degree at the advent of the new Evangelist and in the fulness of His joy he blessed the baby through the Archaka that, even like unto Ramanuja, he shall become an invincible preacher of his Darsana. 
5. In the third year, Venkatanatha's Tonsure ceremony was celebrated, and on the fifth year the alphabet was first taught him. One day the young Venkatanātha (also known as Tuppul Pillai) came with his uncle Sri Appullar to pay his respects to the then famous Pandit and sage Nadadur Ammāl who was conducting a series of lectures on religion and philosophy, for the benefit of his disciples. When Desika appeared, Ammal instinctively dropped the lecture and his disciples feasted their eyes on Venkatanatha and their ears were regaled at hearing his accounts. 
To 
vii 
continue the lecture, Ammal asked his disciples to remind him where he had broken off, but as all had equally been captivated at the boy's charming face, beaming with rare intelligence, they were helpless. Our little youth however came to their relief. speaking thus:- 
"Master! was it not at this point that you stopped when I came ?" 
Nadalur Ammal's joy knew no bounds; he kissed the boy, lulled him on his lap, and blessed him in the same way as sage Pulastya Messed Parisara with a heart filled with bene- 
diction thus:- 
1. पुराणसंहिताकर्त्ता भवान्वन्स भविष्यति । देवतापारमायै च यथावत्वेत्स्यते भवान् ॥ 
6. In course of time, the thread-wearing ceremony was celebrated on Venkatanàtha, who thereupon began the study of the secrets of the Velas with all their Angas, the Ubhaya- 
On child! Thou shalt be the author of Puranas and Sambitas and thou shalt know the truth about 
God as it is. 
2. Auxiliary studies. 
viii 
vedanta', the seven Tarkas, Mimāmsa and the other Sastras from his uncle Appullar, who had derived all that knowledge in his turn from Nadādur Ammāl. This is thus described :- 
* ज्योतिच्छन्दः शब्दशास्त्रप्रवीणः काव्ये श्रेणीरूपकालंकृतिज्ञः । 
मीमांसायाः ब्रह्मकर्मानुगायाः सृष्टा साक्षात्सर्वतन्त्र स्वतन्त्रः ॥ ' सांख्ये योगे भाट्टतन्त्रे गुरुक्तौ शैवे जैने शंकरे भास्करे च । 
शास्त्रे बौद्धे यादवे गर्वितानां प्रत्याख्याता सर्वतन्त्र स्वतन्त्रः ॥ 
5 
" भरद्वाजशाण्डिल्यहारीत मुख्य स्मृति स्तोम सूक्ष्मार्थनिर्णातिदक्षः । पुराणागमादिष्वसाधारणश्रीः सुतो भाति लोकेष्वनन्तार्यसूरेः ॥ 
Ubhaya-double. The Sri Vaishnava Scripturesare two-fold, the Vedas (Samskrit) and the Prabandhas (Dravidian-Tamil). 
1. 
2. Logic. 
3. The Master of all arts (Sri Desika) was an expert in the Sastras, Astronomy, Metrical science, Grammar: well knew Dramatic Composition, Rhetoric and many Kavyas and also wrote works in the Brahma and Karma Mimāmsas. 
4. The Master of all arts refuted all those puffed up with the study of Sankhya, Yoga. Tantra (of Bhatta) the creed of Brihaspati, Pasupata (Tantra), Jainism, the Philosophy of Sankara and Bhaskara, the doctrine of Buddha and the Philosophy of Yadava. 
5. The son of Anantasûri shines in this world with peerless glory in the research of the Puranas 
ix 
7. His Panchasamskara' was performed by Sri Appullar who also instructed him in Sri Bhashya and the other works of Sri Ramanuja as also the Tamil Prabandha of Arayirappadi 
Before his of Tirukkurukhaippirān Pillān. 
20th year, our Author is chronicled as having mastered all the sciences and arts of the day. He says this of himself in verse 15, Act I of this Drama. 
विशत्यब्दे विश्रुतनानाविधविद्यः । 
8. 
Venkatanatha now married a dame (named Tirumangayar) of a Vaidika family and entered the life of a Grihastha (householder) which he retained till the end of his days. Immensely delighted at his nephew's signs of becoming a Vedantic vietor, Sri Appullar, with a view to Ramanuja Darsana spreading in the world, initiated Sri Desika into a very efficacious Mantra known as the Vainateya Mantra. A little time 
the Vedas etc, being an expert in determining the subtle meanings of the Smrities aggregate of Bharadvaja. Sandilya and Hārita. 
1. A Samskara observed by Vaishnavas by which they get Vishnu's Marks of the Conch and Disens. 
2 
A commentary of Tiruvaimozhi. 
X 
after this, Sri Appullar cast off his mortal frame and attained Moksha. 
9. Venkatanātha (Desika) the famed BellIncarnation of the Lord of Tirupati (whose beloved he was of course) now began to shine in all his greatness and really rang (as became the Bell) the glory of God-our Destiny, our Hope, our Soul's Joy, the End of all knowledge and of all Bliss the Fountain. 
10. From far and near, men resorted to Desika's holy abode to learn from him the highest knowledge or, putting their own knowledge to test by comparison, they gave in and joined the ranks of his disciples. 
11. A desire to perform a holy pilgrimage now took possession of our Author and so he set out for Tiruvahindrapuram (3 miles from Cuddalore New Town) to the temple of Sri Devanayaka, alighting en route at Madurantakam where he paid homage to the Resident Deity, Sri Rāma. Arriving at Tiravahindrapuram, our Author bathed in the Garuda river and worshipped the Lord Devanayaka; then he went to the top of the Aushadhadri Hill close by and there, under axi 
Peepul tree, he chanted his Vainatêya Mantra, when, Lo! Vainatêya, (Garuda) appeared unto him and, pleased highly with his deep devotion, Garuda blessed and taught him a very powerful Mantra known as the Hayagriva Mantra by chanting which, Hayagriva, the Deity of all Arts and Sciences, visualised himself to Desika. Highly gratified at the great perseverance and readiness of our author, Hayagriva resolved to bless him richly and so gave him a kind of nectar and told him that henceforth he shall have full power for promulgating the Vaishnava faith and spreading Ramanuja's glory. 
12. It stands to reason that our author, through the influence of Lord Hayagriva, the Omnipotent, the Omniscient and the High, attained extraordinary knowledge by such means, inasmuchas by virtue of penance Vêda-Vyasa 
1. cf. 
39 to 41. 
Mahabharata, Adiparva. Adhyaya I, Slokas 
पुष्य हिमवतः पांडे मेध्ये गिरिगुहालये । 
विशोध्य देहं धर्मात्मा दर्भसंस्तरमाश्रितः ॥ 
शुचिः स नियमों व्यासः शान्तात्मा तपास स्थितः । 
भारतस्येतिहासस्य धर्मेणावीक्ष्य तां गतिम् ॥ 
प्रविश्य योग ज्ञानेन सोऽपश्यत्सर्वमन्ततः ॥ 
xii 
and by the simple grace of Brahma, Valmiki attained the knowledge which eventuated in the birth of the immortal epics, Mahābhārata and Sri Ramayana'. (All such instances in all religions may be remembered here-for instance, the Koran falling from Heaven). It was during our author's stay here that as a tribute to Hayagriva for His boon, he composed "Hayagriva Stôtra?"; "Garuda Panchāsat3" on Garuda, "Achyutasataka' purely in Prakrit dialect on Devanayaka, "Devanayaka Panchāsat," "Mummanikkôvai"," "Navaratnamālai"," "Unjalpāttu"." 
1. cf. Sri Ramayana, Bālakānda, Sarga II, verses 22 to 37 and particularly verse 31. 
श्लोक एव त्वया बद्धो नात्र कार्या विचारणा । 
मच्छन्दादेव ते ब्रह्मन्प्रवृत्तेयं सरस्वती ॥ 
2. Praises on the Horse-faced form of Vishnu. 
3. 50 stanzas praising Garuda. 
4. 100 
the Resident Deity of 
Tiruvahindirapuram. 
5. 50 
6. 
7. 
ます 
poem praising the Lord in 3 metres. 
99 
9 
8 
77 
29 
Lord's Swinging festival. 
xiii 
"Pandupattu," Kazharpattu," "Ammanaipāttu," "Esalpattu," were also composed here by our author. 
13. The followers of the 18 religions were conquered by our author in oral debate and then it was he made his monumental work "Paramata-Bhanga" (the overthrow of alien religions). It was also here that "Raghuviragadya" in honor of Sri Rama was composed. 
14. Many learned men from different parts of the country, admiring Sri Desika's superb intellect, subtle logic, quick and masterly disposal of opposite creeds, remarkable poetic genius, received their lessons in Vedānta from our reputed author and christened him "Kavitārkikasimha" (the Lion of Logic and Poetry) a happy and rare combination. Desika was also Sarratantrasratantra (ie. Master of all arts), but a stone mason challenged him to construct a well to prove his claim. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
A poem praising the Lord's Ball-play 
59 
ララ 
19 
Sri's play at கழக்கோடி. 
GLOLD IT FOOT. 
Sri 
99 
Lord's and Sri's jest-talk. 
19 
Xiv 
Desika took up the gauntlet and built with his own hands a pretty well for the use of Lord Hayagriva by means of the broken and irregular stones handed by the mason, while the well constructed by the mason with the unbroken and regular stones handed him by our author proved ill-built. Even to this day, the well could be seen at Tiruvahindrapuram. 
15. Taking leave of the Lord Devanayaka, our author retraced his steps to Kanchi staying a few days at Tirukkoilur, enroute, to worship the resident deity there, Dêhalisa, in whose praise he composed "Dehalisa stôtra." At Kanchi he spent some years, composing here seven important treatises such as "Varadaraja Panchasat," and seven more works on other occasions. It was here that Pundarikaksha, the son-in-law of Sri Appullar, gave our author the holy image of Hayagriva, worshipped by a long line of Acharyas down from Ramanuja. 
16. Sri Desika, after this respite, started on a tour of pilgrimage to the North. He visited Tirupati and composed the famous "Dayasataka" (100 stanzas invoking the Lord's Mercy). 
IV 
17. Sri Desika next visited Brindavana, Mathura, Ayodhya, Kasi, Naimisaranya, Badarikasrama, Salagrata, Dvaraka, all holy places in the north; on the return journey, he paid his respects to the Resident Deities at Sri Purushôt(Jagannatha), Sri Kurma. Ahôbila, Tirupati. Tiruvellore, whence he proceeded to Sri Perumbudûr where he fell prostrate at the feet of the immortal Lord Ramanuja, chanting his praises thus:- 
taina 
1. अनपायविष्णुपदसंश्रयं भजे कलया कयापि कलयाप्यनुज्झितम् । 
अकलंकयां गमजडाशयोदयं यतिराजचन्द्रमुपरागदूरगम् ॥ जयति सकलविद्यावाहिनी जन्मशैलो 
जनिपथ परिवृत्तिश्रान्तविश्रान्तिशाखी । निखिलकुमतिमायाशर्वरी बालसूर्यो निगम जलधिवेलापूर्णचन्द्रो यतीन्द्रः ॥ 
18 He also visited Tiruvellikkeni. Tiruk- 
1. Bow I, to the Moon-Yatirāja, the resorter of eternal Vishnupada fai, the Moon not bereft of any Kalā even partially (b), but free from the usual staincontact.-the Moon that originated not from a Jadaseyn (e) the Moon that is unmune from the influence of the Eclipse (a) Sky and Vishnu's feet. (6) Beam and Art. (c) Ocean and dull-headed. 
2. For translation See verse 11, page 116 
xvi 
kadalmalai (the Seven Pagodas) and Tirunirmalai, returned to Kanchi and resumed his teachings on the Ubhaya Vedanta. 
sor- 
19. About this time, an Advaiti Sanyasin challenged our Desika for an oral contest, but our Simha vanquished him easily. As a cerer, however, the Advatin plied his art against Desika. He dived into a tank and drinking its water, caused our Author's belly to swell to bursting, but being a Sarratantrasratantra Desika knew the antidote to the trick and caused the water to spit out of a tree close by. The Advaitin who was witnessing all this fell at the feet of the Victor and apologised. 
20. When returning from Tirupati, our Desika met an old friend of his, the famous Vidyaranya on the banks of the Tungabhadra. Bukkaraya, a king of Vijayanagar in 1335 A. D. was long on the look-out for a holy man who would exorcise an evil spirit of which his daughter was obsessed. Vidyaranya's prayer also notwithstanding, Desika made quite light of the offer and said:- 
'निस्पृहस्य नृपस्तृणम्' 
xvii 
21. Sri Desika had a supreme scorn for worldly greatness. In answer to another cordial invitation of Vidyaranya, to go to his king with promise of great rewards, our author wrote in reply:- 
सिलं किमनल भवेदनलमोदरं बाधितुं 
पयः प्रमृतिपूरकं किमु न धारकं सारसम् । अयन्नमलमलकं पथि पञ्चरं कञ्चरं 
भजन्ति विबुधा सुधा यहह कुक्षितः कुक्षितः ॥ 
Disappointed at this retort, Vidyaranya renewed his invitation after sometime which iner with the same fate by a further reply as follows:- 
3. क्षोणी कोणतांमपालन कला दुर्वारगर्वानल- 
अभ्यत्क्षुइनरेन्द्रचाडुरचनाधन्यान्न मन्यामहे । 
I. To a desireless person, a king is but a straw. 
Shall not the grains found in the barvest field appease the fire of appetite? Shall not the handful of water from a tank suffice to keep life up? Shall not the tattered under-cloth leand without any effort on the bigh ways be useful? Vain. alas! Wise men resort to kings just for the sake of the spar-spaced stomach. 
3. We consider it rulers of men, conerited 
s. s. ii. 
fortunate to flatter paitry e.ely with the fiery unfettered 
xviii 
देवं सेवितुमेव निश्चिनुमंहं योऽसौ दयालुः पुरा 
धानामुष्टिमुचे कुचेलमुनये दत्तेस्म वित्तेशताम् ॥ 
Vidyaranya would not let matters drop. He renewed his request this time by offering to bring the king of Vijayanagar to a place ten miles distant from the capital, where he beseeched our author to stop. To this, Sri Desika sent his famous reply:- 
1 नास्ति पित्राजितं किञ्चिन्न मया किञ्चिदार्जितम् । 
अस्ति मे हस्तिशैलाग्रे वस्तु पैतामहं धनम् ॥ 
Immensely pleased at this unshakable scorn for wealth, Vidyaranya ever remained our author's staunch admirer. Our author always led a life of Uncharritti (alms-taking). His scorn for wealth is also exemplified by another incident. 
pride arising from the authority over a microscopical moiety of the world's corner. To serve that Supreme Lord alone, we have made up our minds, -the Lord who formerly transformed the sage Kuchela, who presented a dole tull of rice (), into the Lord of the Riches. 
1 
Father's earnings I have none: my own earnings I have none Grand-father's wealth (Lord Varada worshipped by Brahma alone I own, on the summit of Hastigiri (Kanchi). 
xix 
One day Sri Desika's wife brought to his notice that in the doles he had collected, a gold coin was found. Our author took a stick and pushed it away, as if it were a loathsome 
worm. 
22. About this time, a trouble arose in Srirangam. 
A number of Advaiti Pandits descended from the north of India and challenged the Vaishnavas that unless they (Vaishnavas) conquered them (the Advaitins) in controversy, they should embrace their faith. The Vaishnavas at Srirangam were in a puzzle as to whom to choose as a suitable Refutant and they could think of none other than our Desika. They accordingly wrote to him at Kauchi as follows:- 
1 श्रीमच्छीरङ्गनाथस्य विष्वक्सेनस्य शासनम् । 
तद्भक्तभक्तभक्तानां शिरोभूषणतां गतम् ॥ 
23. Accepting this invitation, Sri Desika came all the way from Kanchi, paying his worship to Lord Uttamar, bathing in the river 
1. This is the mandate of the Archangel Vishvaksena of the all-blessed Sri Ranganatha and it shall be an ornament to the crest of His devotees servant's devotee. 
XX 
(the Coleroon) and lifted his hands in worship to the shrine of Srirangam from the other side of the river. The Vaishnavas of Srirangam received him on the northern bank of the Coleroon and escorted him by the northern gate of the big shrine into Lord Ranganatha's temple. He was led to the several shrines of the Acharyas and the Alvars, in the order, as is customary with all visiting devotees. Entering and rounding the inner Prakara (enclosure) and prostrating the Pranavakara Veda Sringa Vimana (the top of the sanctum sanctorum) Sri Desika paid his obeisance to Lord Ranganatha, chanting his famous "Bhagavaddhyanasôpana" (making the mind dwell on the Lord's Form from the to top). No sooner did Sri Desika take his seat with his disciples on the Mantapam, than an Advaiti opponent came to the place and expressed his wonder saying:-- 
कीतिर्महति आकारो ह्रस्वः । 
"Great is the fame but small is the frame (Akāra or the vowel з)"- 
Taking this as the challenge, our author retorted that the vowel 3 cannot be short and thexxi 
controversy between the two faiths thus begun raged for several days with the result that the Advaitins were defeated in the end. A full report of the controversy was taken down by Desika's disciples which he shaped into a book called Satadûshani. Lord Ranganatha, now highly pleased with our author's consolidation of the Rāmānuja Siddhanta, conferred on him the title of Vedantacharya. So jointly he became Vedanta-Desika, a name by which he is popularly and very widely known- 
श्रीरङ्गराज दिव्याज्ञालब्धवेदान्ताचार्यपदः । 
("having got the title of Vedantacharya by the divine command of Sri Ranganatha".) Lord Ranganatha's Illustrious spouse (Ranganayaki) is said to have conferred the title of Sarratantrasratantra (already mentioned). The vanquished Pandits argued with Vedanta Desika that inasmuch as he and not the other Vaishnavas defeated them, the holy Tirtham (sacred water) should be offered to them next to our author. But our author is more than a match for them in the ways of the world as in the ways of religion. He ranged all the Vaishnava Savants 
xxii 
and had them first served with the Tirtha and he followed them. Of course the opponents came next to him for the honor, as they wished. The Advaitins thenceforth became his disciples and returning to their homes, they promulgated the teachings of Vedanta Desika round the regions of Kasi and Kashmira. 
24. Vedanta Desika now resolved to spend the rest of his days at Srirangam, discoursing on Vedanta to all worthy hearers. 
1 
वादिद्विपशिरोभङ्गपञ्चाननपराक्रमः । श्रीमद्वेङ्कटनाथार्यो वेदान्तगुरुरेधते ॥ 
No less than 30 times did he teach Sri Bhashya alone- 
'त्रिंशद्वारं श्रावितशारीरकभाष्यः ' 
Daring his stay in Srirangam he is credited with writing 25 works in Samskrit and Tamil. 
25. In the 13th century, Srirangam was ruled by the Pandyas and the spire of the sanctum sanctorum was gold-plated by Jata- 
1. Sri Venkatanatha, (Sri Vedanta Desika) the Lion to break the head of the Elephant-Arguers, prospers. 
xxiii 
Varma Sundara Pandya, who ruled from 1251 to 1261 A. D. Malik Kafir, General of Allanddin, the Emperor of Delhi, captured Madura in 1310 A. D. During their predatory incursions, the Mahammadans entered Srirangam and mercilessly massacred every one they met. The famous Sudarsana Bhattarya, the author of Sruta-Prakasika', was one of those who were killed. Before his death, he consigned the care of his works written on Cadjan (palm leaves) and his two sons to our author. Desika and the two children with the gloss lay hid amidst Porpses heaped all about the fated place. After the vandals disappeared, Desika hastened with the children to Mysore country (Tirunarayanaparam) where he live some years. It was here he composed his Abhitistava-1 work of deep devotion addressed to the Deity of Srirangam to spare the country and the Srirangam shrine in particular from the hands of the Mahammadans. 
26. Sage Vidyaranya rehabilitated the decdining kingdom of Vijayanagara in 1335 A.D. and 
1. The great gloss on the Bhashya of Ramanuja (Brahma-Sutras). 
xxvi 
Akshôbhyamani. Our author was invited to be the umpire but he declined to go personally. The two antagonists (the former an Advaitin and the latter a Dvaitin) submitted their points of dissension to Desika in writing. The Advaitins maintain that our author expressed his opinion in favor of Vidyaranya on the authority of the following verse :- 
अक्षोभ्यं क्षोभयामास विद्यारण्यो महामुनिः । 
"The great sage Vidyaranya defeated Akshobhya." 
While the Madhvas maintain on the authority of the following verse that the decision was in favor of Akshobbyamuni :- 
| असिना तत्त्वमसिना परजीवप्रभेदिना । 
विद्यारण्य महारण्यमक्षोभ्यमुनिरच्छिनत् ॥ 
Our author had the occasion to refer his Satadushani to Vidyaranya for criticism but the latter could find no fault except an aspirate over too much. It was then Sri Desika is said to have written a treatise called "Chakara-samarthana " 
1. Sage Akshobya eut asunder the great forest of Vidyaranya by the sword--the sword of "Tatvamasi that well set forth to the world the difference between God and Soul, 
xxvii 
28. Again another Pandit hailed from the north and showed our author Krishnamisra's Philosophical Drama Prabodha-Chandrôdaya (the rising of the Moon of Intellect) which, according to the followers of Sankara, dispels the On darkness of ignorance and effects salvation. reading this work, Sri Desika wrote-" Sankalpa Suryodaya" in ten acts (the Drama for which this life-sketch is prefixed) meaning "the Dawn of the Divine Will or Grace," which, according to the followers of Ramanuja dispels the darkness of Samsara. 
29. Our author, it was said, had a great esteem for Kalidasa whom he called Karisarvabhauma (the prince of poets). Desika composed the "Hamsasandesa" one of the -melodious poems in Samskrit on the analogy of Kalidasa's Meghasandesa, "Yadavabhyudaya" is another of our author's works written as a rejoinder to Poet Dindima's "Raghavabhyudaya." His "Tatvamuktakalapa" with his own commentary on the same, "Sarvartha-siddhi" is a poetical treatise on philosophical and religions themes. His famous work "Adhikaranasāravali" is a compendium of Sri Bhashya. Nainacharya, Sri Desika's son 
xxviii 
wrote an excellent commentary on this work. The Stotras (or praises to God, etc) of Vedanta Desika are the specimens in themselves of superior literature and enshrine superb ideas. Vast again are his prose writings. 
"Sarvarthasiddhi," 
alluded to already and "Nyayaparisuddhi," the "Nyayasiddhanjana," the "Tatvatika," the "Tatparya chandrika," the "Sesvara-Mimamsa," the "Mimamsa-Paduka" and "Nikshêparaksha," are some of them. The Rahasya-Traya-Sara is one of our author's best treatises. written chiefly for the sake of those to whom the study of the Vedas is prohibited. It contains 32 chapters and each chapter begins and ends with Samskrit and Tamil verses which sum up the matter contained in the same. The subject matter of Tiruvaymozhi was epitomised by Desika into 100 stanzas called the Dramidopanishatsara" Doddayacharya of Socha-simhapura (sholingar) who wrote Chandamaruta, a commentary Satadûshani wrote also a biography of our author named Vaibhava-Prakasika and its full commentary in tamil has been written by 
On 
1. The Tamil Prabaudias, of which this is St. Sathagopa's Facile Princeps. 
xxix 
Mabaryadasa. Our author's devotion to Sri Ramanuja is beyond description. He wrote "Yatirajasaptati," an exemplary work on Ramanuja, bis great ideal Pontiff of the Vaishnavie Visishtadvaitic Faith. 
30. Sri Vedanta Desika was not only a prolific writer, but a genius in impromptu works. The Paduka-sahasra" a work in thousand verses, all with reference to a single theme, viz the Holy Sandals of the Lord, was for example composed in three hours when his title of Karitarkikasimha was questioned by other Pandits, one of whom was able to compose in but 500 slokas called "Padakamalasahasra 
praise of the holy feet of the Lord, taking a whole night for it. The unique personality of Desika was evident in his being a personification of gentleness and modesty, meekness and humility. Only two instances out of many to prove this may be mentioned in this brief sketch. When the unfinished "Padakamalasahasra" not even read in the next morning before Lord Ranganatha (which is the usual procedure), our author, whose "Padukasahasra " was read and applauded by the scholars assembled, very 
was 
XXX 
modestly referred to his wagerer's production', instead of gloating on his own glory, as follows:- 
1 सूते सूकरयुवती सुतशतमत्यन्तदुर्भगं झटिति । 
करिणी चिराय सूते सकलमहीपाललालितं कलभम् ॥ 
Again to test Desika's humility he was invited by a Vaishnava gentleman to his house. He hung some slippers over the doorway. Desika came and discovering that this was intended to humiliate him, when he must pass beneath the slippers, he clasped them and placed them on his head, exclaiming:- 
* कर्मावलम्बकाः केचित्केचिदज्ञानावलम्बकाः । 
वयं तु हरिदासानां पादरक्षावलम्बका ॥ 
31. Sri Desika had now stayed long at Srirangam and so a longing to visit some of the Holy Shrines, in the Pandya, Chera, and Chola kingdoms, seized him. He therefore started on a tour worshipping enroute the Resident Deities 
1. In a trice doth a she-pig hring forth a hundred of its young ones, extremely wretched, but after a long time only doth a she-elephant produce a baby-elephant, esteem-worthy of all kings. 
2. Some lean on duties(Karma): others on wisdom. but we lean on the shoes of God's lieges. 
xxxi 
at Srivilliputhur, 
Tirunagari. 
Tiruvellarai, 
Tiruk-kndandai, Sri Mushnam etc. and returned again to Kanchi to have a sight again of his most beloved Lord, Varadaraja. Here he was expounding the Ubhaya Vedanta to his numerous audiences, when a snake-charmer appeared on the scene and challengeed his title to Sarratantrasratantra. Though unwilling at first to deal with a man of this description, his disciples would have him do some miracle. In every religion we have had men who would not be convinced unless they saw miracles done by their Saviours. So Desika stooped to them and drawing seven lines he asked the snake charmer to draw forth his venomous reptiles. These were let out but none of them dare cross the lines, when, enraged, the charmer let out his most powerful cobra Sankhapala, which, crossing all the seven lines and hissing, made for Dêsika. But our Desika, as is already known, was Master of the Garuda-Mantra, antidote meet to the race of the cobras, and as soon as he uttered the same, Garuda (the Brahman Kite) suddenly came and, swooping down, made away with the cobra. 
xxxii 
32. From Kanchi, next Desika proceeded to Tirupati, worshipped once again Lord Srinivasa and finally returned to Srirangani to spend the rest of his days in quiet contemplation, retiring from all religious wranglings, exclaiming :- 
निर्विष्टं यतिसार्वभौमवच सामावृत्तिभि यौवनं 
निर्धूते तर पारतन्त्र्यानरेया नीताः सुखं वासराः । अङ्गीकृत्य सतां प्रसत्तिमसतां गर्वोऽपि निर्वापितः शेषायुष्यपि शेषिदंपतिदयादीक्षामुदक्षामहे || 
33. Desika had vowed himself, as already said, to lead a life of absolute poverty. A bachelor who was collecting money for his marriage was directed to apply to Desika for help. This was a mischief devised by his adversaries to test Desika. Our author, however, was keen enough to perceive the intended hoax 
1. By many repetitions of the study of the works of the king of Ascetics. (Ramanuja), passed we our young age. Many are the days that we spent in happiness, ever bating the bane of service under men. Acting on the tradition of the virtuous, have we humbled the conceit of the vicious. For the rest of life, we only look forward to the vow of realising the fruition of the grace of the Perpetual Divine Couple.ÔM=(A-U-M) 
श्रीमते रामानुजाय नमः 
Bow to Blessed Rāmānuja 
SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 
OR 
The Dawn of the Divine Will. 
ACT I. 
1. May Narayana, the Lord of Sri serve me to overcome (overcross) all contretemps.'-Nārāyana who is envisaged when devotion-steeped dawn breaketh,-Narayana whose Will-Sunrise dispelleth the darkness of worldly wanderings of all Jivas at the termination of Prārabdhakarma,-Narayana whose super-excellence is 
1. Conception, Birth, Dotage, Death, etc., also meaning impediments in the way of completing this work. 
Embodied Souls. The word Jiva or Jiv-atman wherever used in this book means embodied ātman (soul.) 
That part of Karma, which has begun to fructify. 
s. s. 1 
2 
ever typified by His Truth'-(indicating) Weapons2 and Adornments." 
2. May Padma's Spouse, of Compassion, the Milky Sea, be with us to compass our success,Spouse-the Target, right-hit by the Soul-shaft, from Pranava-bow well shot by those holy ones 
.whose 
fixed thoughts are. by sruth-proved 
1. The Tatvas, viz, the Twenty-six categories. According to the Sankhya-Vedantins, the 26 categories are:- 
Fire, Air, Ether, Earth, Water (the elements) 5 Their respective rudiments or Tanmåtrās 
2 Eyes, 2 Ears, 2 Noses, Tongue, Skin, 
Brain and Rectum 
Nature (Prakriti), Mahat, Ahamkara. Mind 
Soul and God 
5 
... 10 
6 
26- 
2. The Holy Discus etc. 
3. 
See Astra-biûshayadhyaya in the Vishnu- 
The Holy Kaustubha etc. Purana 
4. Sri or Lakshmi-the wife of Vishuu. 
5. cf. प्रणवो धनुः शरोह्यात्मा ब्रह्मतलक्ष्यमुच्यते । 
अप्रमत्तेन वेद्धव्यं शरवत्तन्मयो भवेत् ॥ 
6. The Holy Mantra 
(Aum) 
7. Also means "The Strong." 
8. 
Means the Vedas (the Hindu Scriptures OF Revelations.) 
3 
Graces (Divine), lured,-(Spouse) in whose bosom-mid, flasheth full the Kaustubha-Soul. 
Prologue ends. 
ENTER SUTRADHARA.3 Sutradhara.-Esteemed Gentry! I am bid by this august assembly composed of saintly men like yourselves, who, in order to witness festivals, have trod far and wide over several holy places like Srirangam, Tirupati, Kanchipura, Tiru-Narayana- 
1. 
Ο 
pura, 
Purushottama and Pānduranga where our (Sarvesvara), the Blessed Lord" 
With reference to the strong man, it means, 
Bow-string drawn to the ear. 
The gem obtained at the churning of the ocean and worn by Vishnu on his breast. (See n. 3, p. 2.) General Notes:-The first benedictory verse is intended to succinctly set forth the great efficacy of Bhakti (love to God), and the second, that of Prapatti (Surrender to God.) 
3. Stage-manager. 
4. 
5. 
All-Lord i. e., Universal God. 
Bhagavan. (See this word explained in J. R. A. S. by A. G. Acharya.) 
4 
is installed, the Lord before whose lotusfeet the gem-set diadems of myriads of Devas and Asuras form, as it were, so many waving lights, the Lord whose vow always is to protect all who seek refuge of Him, whose duties are right-well done, with lotus-born Lakshmi co-operate,-Who, like the cloud (rain), quencheth the wild-fire of mundane misery. The dust of the different places of the earth hath been holy-made by the dust of your holy steps. Ye have chanced to visit, and sojourn in, this Isle of Srirangam, begirt by Kariri',-your steps, bent hither by longings to witness festivals. Bid by ye, who in saintliness match with Ananta, Garuda,3 Vishvaksêna,'-bid by ye, the universally worship-worthy,-(by ye) exempt of the least trace of sin,-(by ye) whose character is in tune with high birth 
1. # 
2. 
2 
the wind-increased i.e., gaining freshes by the blowing of the South-West winds. 
The serpent-couch on which the Almighty reposes. 
3. The principal bird-vehicle of Vishnu, 
4. 
The Archangel and First-in-command of Vishnu. 
1. 
and learning,-(by ye) who fall foul, as doth the mad elephant on plantain-plants, on opponents heretical and agnostic, whirling in the vortex of perpetual illusion,-(bid by ye) who are the ornaments of the vast world,-(by ye), who are master-teachers of the mysteries of the Upanishads,-(by ye) the versed in the Circle of Sciences, by such worshipful Arya-worthies then (I am bid.) Bidden what? 
3. 
This:-That I should entertain this august gathering with a troupe of actors who enact the parts of diverse human attributes, such as Wisdom, etc., which removeth the lust of men for weltering in Samsara,' by enacting a Drama in which the superb ninth emotion,-Peace,-findeth 
The tendency to be always wordly without any thought of spirituality. 
2. Hindu Dramatists recognise ordinarily eight 
emotions:शृङ्गारहास्य करुणारौद्रवीरभयानकाः । 
बीभत्माद्भुतसंज्ञौ चेत्यष्टौ नाट्ये रसाः स्मृताः ॥ 
while others recognise af as the ninth 
emotion. 
6 
a prominent place like other emotions, such as Heroism, etc., which captivate the minds of men, bent on Dharma,' Artha and Kāma. 
3 
The mandate of this learned gathering is now accepted by me, with the wager,' (that I shall forfeit these titles),-me known as Vaikuntha Vinodin, the son of that Master Dramatist Santoshapāla," the disciple of Sanmargavardhana," the founder of the Histrionic Art and Lion to the actor-elephants of the opposite creed. And now this House, crowded with the elite of the place, 
1. Duty or Works. 
2. Goods or Riches. 
3. Enjoyments. 
These three and salvation (Môksha) are the recognised 4 ends and aims of life (purusharthas). Peace is required for Môksha. 
4. The wager is the relinquishment of the claim for all the good qualities for the manager, if the particular Drama bidden be not enacted to the satisfaction of the said audience. 
5. Lit., Entertainer of the residents of Vaikuntha, 
the abode of Sri Nārāyana. 
6. Lit., The enhancer of happiness. 
7. Lit., The cultivator of righteous ways. 
seemeth all eager to witness this divine performance. 
3 
4. Now doth shine this assembly with highly illustrious men, who well discriminate Natya,' Dêsa, Mārga, but who would turn deaf ears to all unscientific performances, and who seem, as it were, the guardian-angels of the Histrionic Art. 
I now therefore bow to the Primeval Lord, the Donor of all treasures of wisdom, the Manifester of Supreme Essence, even in His different Incarnations such as the Fish etc., the Exsiccator of the ocean of ignorance, and the Destroyer of devotion to other deities. 
5. May, the Horse-faced' Vasudeva's5 
1. Gesturing by putting oneself in the position of 
the character impersonated. 
2. 
Dancing in keeping with heating time and music. 
3. Dancing with gesturing. 
4. 
Hayanana (Hayagriva)--one of Vishnu's incar- 
nations. 
Sri Narayana, the All-pervader. 
1. 
Form known as Vagisa', the Dawn to the night of nescience, the unique Collyrium to the eye of wisdom and the Elucidater of the Vedas, illumine me! 
(With hands suppliant). 
6. May Sriman Narayana, who assumeth the twice-five Incarnations, to Whom the pious, full of devotion in the holy shrine of Srirangam, ever do resort,-Narayana with whose diverse Incarnations, Lakshmi, assuming appropriate Forms Herself, doth co-operate with him in His manifold works," make us all blessed. 
Muse or the Lord of poetic inspiration. 
The double meaning implied in the 6th Sloka is: 
May the sportive Nata, (Chief Actor) who assumeth the guise of different characters, who is assisted by several actors, all highly appreciative of the stage, the Nata in whose diverse actions the Nati herself, also putting on appropriate guises, doth co-operate with suitable gestures, give us all joy. 
2. Works such as saving the good etc. 
9 
(Seeming meditative for a moment, and then with joy.) 
Graced am I now by the mercy of the Almighty, who hath in His hands the very be-ness of all beings. 
7. 
I shall therefore now establish the faith of the Acharyas, making Wisdom the pivot of this Drama, discussing at the same time the moot points of the Histrionic Art, rendered fragrant by constant researches conducted in the field of the Upanishads". 
(Turning towards the curtain) 
Let this stage now be graced with the presence of thy ladyship. 
1. The founders of Visishtādvaita Philosophy- 
Nathamuni, Yamuna, Rāmānuja etc. 
The Drama in which Viveka (wisdom) is the hero. 
3. The metaphysical writings attached to the Brahmayas, the chief aim of which is to ascertain the secret meaning of the Vedas. 
10 
ENTER NATI.1 
Nati. At thy service, Sir! This thy beloved 
servant awaiteth thy commands. 
Sutradhara.-Are our expert dramatis persona 
getting ready by wearing 
various 
guises, suited to the rôle to be played in obedience to the behests of this serene assembly? 
Nati.-My Lord! Surely the troupe of actors hasten, who are as much subject to thy control, as thy limbs, hands, legs, eyes, etc. are, the moment thou thinkest of them. By the way, I have one thing to ask of thee :What is the name and nature of the play about to be staged? 
Sutradhara.-My Love! Knowest thou not the new Drama, named Sankalpa-suryodaya, the hero of which is Vivêka ? 
8. It is only the wise, who know the 
1. Chief actress-generally the wife of the Sûtra- 
dhara.11 
true nature of Paramātman1 and of Jivatman that will appreciate the singular plot of this Drama, where, the good and bad aspects of Jiva personate their respective presiding deities, and constitute the diverse characters (consequent). 
9. This striking performance will appeal even to men worldly disposed, for as much as it aboundeth in, (the demonstration of) the emotion of Heroism, evidenced in the conquest of Māhāmôha by Vivêka,--in the emotion of Mercy by the attitude of the Lord,-in the emotion of Peace by the attitude of the Jiva seeking for salvation. 
Words fail me to adequately convey the singular significance of this Drama. Countless are the conches in the ocean, but not one of them can be the Conch Pāncha- 
1. Supreme Spirit (God.) 
3. Grand Illusion. 
2. Embodied Soul. 
4. Protecting the virtuous and destroying the vicious &c. [vide, Bhagavad-gità: paritranaya &c.] 
12 
janya,' adorning the lotus hand of Vishnu ! 
10. Let those ordinary rubies of little lustre which deceive the simple world remain in the mansions of the rich; of what avail are these ?-think of this for a while; could any even among the oldest rubies stand comparison, with that ruby which illumineth the Mole Srivatsa Vishnu's breast and which acteth as a mirror to Sri Lakshmi's sports? 
on 
The matter to be mentioned presently 
is the rarer feature of this Drama :- 
1. The name of the Conch worn as a Weapon in the 
hand of Vishnu. 
The implied meaning of verse (10) is :Wordly dramas seduce the minds of simpletons who cannot discriminate the main 
essentials of a scientific drama, but this is a rare drama (spiritual) which baffles all comparison 
with other dramas. 
2. Such as the Syamantaka-a ruby for which Lord Krishna fought hard with Jambavan, Sri Rama's Bear-Chieftain. For fuller particulars, read Syamantaka-Upākhyana. Canto X, Sri Bhagavata. 
13 
11. The plot of this Drama is so arranged as to discriminate the good from the bad. It is wrought by a playwright of high altruistic temperament, whose mastery of the Upanishads is well renowned, the special object set in view being the salvation of mankind. 
Nati.-My Lord! Whose opus is this Drama? 
This audience doth evince sympathy for us, begot by its sense of high veneration held for this self-same dramaturgist! 
Sutradhara.-My Love! Didst thou not hear 
this :- 
That there is a Poet named Sri Venkatanātha, the son of Anantasûri,-respected all over the world,-the wonder of the universe, the ornament of the Visvamitra'Gotra, the Lotus to the sports of stainless 
1. Kausika-Gôtra or descent, one of the important 
Gotras by which the twiee-born are recognised. 
The Goddess of learning, Sarasvati, is supposed to live in the lotus flower. Stripped of the figure. the meaning is the seat of all learning. 
I. 
14 
Sarasvati,-the Treasure-house of infinite virtues, and himself the son of PundarikākshaSomayaji,-Venkatanatha, the acquirer of the additional name of Vedantacharya through the divine commands of Lord Ranganatha,-the wearer of the renourned 
A large number of Advaiti Pandits from the North of India hailed once to Srirangam and challenged the Vaishnava savants there that they must either conquer them in controversy or embrace their creed. In fear and anxiety the Vaishnavas of Srirangam sent word to Venkatanatha at Kanchi (Conjeevaram), who, responding, came all the way to Srirangam and in Lord Ranganatha's temple defeated the Advaitins, after seven days' disputation. A full report of this disputation is collected and shaped into a book called Şatadushani. Lord Ranganatba, immensely pleased at the great abilities of our Venkatanātha addressed him thus:- 
"Well are we pleased that thou hast put down thy opponents and established the Ramanuja-Siddhants which alone describes our nature truly. From now thou shalt be known in the world by our own title "Sri Vedantacharya." (See Biographical sketch.) 
15 
title of Karitarkika-simha,'-by virtue of his abilities, the dispeller of all doubts likely to arise in all sciences and arts2,-the Acharya whose disciples hoist his triumphant banners in all the quarters ten. 
12. Ever do the virtuous, who appreciate the sweet fragrance of this author's work which are composed of soft, hard, and middling expressions resembling a garland made of (diverse) flowers, admire him. 
13. Of the race, the progenitor of which was capable of endowing the cosmos with 
1. Lit. The Lion of Poetry and Logic. 
2 
3. 
Sarvatantra-svatantra-the title given by Sri Ranganayaki on the same occasion. For fuller particulars the readers are referred to the life sketch of Vedanta Desika prefixed to this book. 
अतिकोमलशब्दसंदर्भा 
4. अतिकठिनशब्दसंदर्भा 
5. 
अनतिकोमलशब्दसंदर्भा 
6. The allusion here is to Visvamitra proclaiming in anger, disappointed at Indra's obstructing 
16 
a new Indra, or creating a new cosmos without an Indra, the self-same race as that of the universal mother Sāvitri-the cause of rebirth', according to the sages, of the twice-born, our author was born. 
Further- 
14. Wise men surmise, through close reasoning that this author is the Incarnation of the Vishnu's Bell, used in His Worship by the lotus-seated (Praja- 
2 
Trisanku's ascent to Svarga because of the latter's desire to enter into Svarga with his physical body, which Visvamitra undertook to do. The implication is, our author Venkatanatha is capable of miracles no less than that of his renowned ancestor. 
ef. अन्यमिन्द्रं करिष्यामि लोको वा स्यादनिन्द्रकः । 
Ramayana-Bala Kānda. 
1. The Upanayana or Thread Ceremony in which 
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, and Vai yas, take their spiritual birth after chanting the Gayatri; hence these three castes are also known as the Twice- 
Born. 
cf. सावित्र्या ऋषिर्विश्वामित्रः 
Vedantacharya is the incarnation of the Holy 
Bell at Tirupati, vide his life sketch. 
17 
pati'), the Bell that frighteneth the armies of the Asuras2. 
and 
15. To gratify the Lord Supreme, the Blessed Venkatanātha, the master of all knowledge at his twentieth year, the expounder of Brahmasûtra-Bhāshya to his disciples a score and ten times, composed this superb and melodious* drama, surcharged with superior sense. 
3 
Nati.-My Lord! How shall the tough composition of this Poet, always bent on Vêdāntic researches, and whose adamantine logic uprooteth the trees of Pāshandas,5 be fit to be put on boards by persona like us? 
Sutradhara. (Smiling) Lady! I shall just 
1. 
2. 
Semi Creator (Brahma or the Demiurge.) 
The Demons-the enemies of the Gods. 
3. Sri Bhashya of Sri Ramanuja. 
4 
The word used in the original has another meaning viz., "in conformity with the Srutis." 
5. Those who treat the Supreme Lord Sri Nārā- 
yana as but the equal of other deities. 
s. s. 2 
18 
reply to the first of your two questions'. Thinkest thou this Author is one who hath merely restrained the actions of his senses and who hath inerely fixed his mind intently on the enjoyment of the Supreme Being? If so, I shall just tell thee the following:- 
16. If the Muse, worthy of the galaxy of the sages, Manu, Vyāsa and Valmiki, fragrant with ambrosia, desireth herself to grace a person, who could stay her? Will any stop the Gangā which falleth on the matted hair of Siva, as arid as the Vindhya Mount, if she falleth, of her ow accord, on a lame person? I shall now answer the second question. 
17. Doth not the celestial Gangā, with a 
1. The two questions are:-1. How could language used for philosophic researches be made to suit a dramatic production? 2. How could language used for vehement disputations with opponents fit in for a dramatic production? 
The implication in verse 17 is:-There is nothing inconsistent in an author who is usually an expert disputant composing a melodious drama. 
19 
force sublime and so terrible as to split mountains like the Himalaya, and which maketh even the head of Siva tremble, spread her sweet, clear and beautiful waters on the Earth as well? 
Nati.-(With joy). What my Lord sayeth is right, but how to account for the embodiment of the Emotion of Peace in this Drama when the Masters of the Histrionic Art maintain that there is no such thing as that emotion ? 
Sutradhara. (contemptuously.) 
Lady! Them, then, I do not consider as connoisseurs of the Histrionic Art. 
18. Methinks that they hold the opinion that the Emotion of Peace could not be -enacted, perhaps because of the difficulty to find in this world an audience to appreciate that emotion. 
Further :- 
19. The Erotic Emotion pampereth the ways of the wicked; the Emotion of 
20 
Valour breedeth mutual contempt; the Emotion of Wonder bordereth on the grotesque; the other Emotions are paltry enough. But Peace alone then by elimination is the Emotion that allayeth the agony of the mind. 
Nati. This superior Emotion (Peace) is of the experience of great sages, such as, Sanaka, Sanandana and others. Still how could this Emotion, the essence of which is Yoga which is attainable only by the control of the sense-group, be represented in a drama, fit alone to be witnessed by philistines? 
Sutradhara.-Lady! Say not so. For:- 
for thee to raise this doubt, we are not going. to depict the creed of Alêpakas, who give up the performance of all duties. 
There are the Varnasrama2 duties, expounded times without number, by the 
1. Those who maintain that the renunciation of 
dutios entails no sin on man e. g. the Sankhyās etc. 
2. Duties ordained for the different Castes and Orders.1. 
3. 
4. 
5). 
21 
Divine Lord Krishna,'-duties ennobled by the doctrine of Satvikatyaga and which could not be abandoned even by the adhe- 
3 
5 
rents of Nivritti-Dharma. It is the discharge of these duties that giveth the lovers of Ranga' their lives' goal. Further hear and see more, about the greatness of the true Histrionic Art. 
For, it is said:- 
20. That which could not be depicted in a Drama is neither Sāstra nor Vidyā,7 
I. E. cf. सात्विकेन त्यागेन कार्यमित्येव यत्कर्म नियतं क्रियतेऽजुर्न । सङ्गं त्यक्ता फलं चैव स त्यागस्सात्विको मतः ॥ [Bh. Gi.] 
Dedication of the fruit of action to God. [See n. 1.] Duties pertaining to the realisation of Moksha. Two meanings:-(1) Lovers of Srirangam; (2) 
Lovers of the Stage. 
Two meanings:-(1) Livelihood. (2) Soul-pilgrimage. The implication is that the performance of Nityakarma is obligatory even for Yogis so long as they retain life. 
6. Sciences relating to Veda, 14 in number. 
7. 
Study relating to Vedanta. 
Dahara, Kuhara, Madhu, etc. 
22 
Silpa,1 nor Kalā,' Yogas nor Jñāna'. 
Nati. A herculian task hast thou taken upon thyself! With fickleness natural to womanfolk, I tremble with fear at the thought of the leaders of the opposite creed who are seized with the demon of envy. 
Sutradhara.-Lady! Enough of thy timidity. 
Now fortune is in our favor. 
For:- 
21. Faultless are the rich characteristics of this Drama, and its exquisite elegance is to the taste of a friendly audience. No small circumstances these, conducive to the appreciation of a dramatic troupe. 
Further :- 
22. All alert (too) is the best of poetsVenkatesa-the seat of the treasure of 
1. Ayurveda etc. 
2. (64) Arts. 
3. 
Yama, Niyama, etc. 
4. 
Knowledge of the Brahman. 
23 
knowledge; proficient in the art of Drama is our troupe by long practice; renowned and impartial is this distinguished gathering: and 
and our stage is Srirangam, the heirloom' of Sri Rāma and others (of the Raghu-Race). 
Thou hast also to consider this :- 
23. Let men devoid of quiescence choose to extol or censure this work, itself full 
1. Lord Ranga appeared before Prajapati in His 
Pranavaākāra-Vimāna and Prajapati was worshipping Him for several years in Satyalôka, when the latter presented Him to Ikshvāku, the progenitor of the race of Sri Rama, through his son Manu. Sri Rama made a present of this, his family deity, Ranga to Vibbishana, who then set out for Lanka, with the desire of installing Lord Ranga there for his worship, but lo! when he reached the present isle of Srirangam between the two branches of the Kaveri, Ranga was so enamoured of the shady groves and green verdure of the isle that he took His abode there and declined to accompany Vibhishapa any further. Such is the sanctity of Srirangam, the place where this drama was first staged. ("Sriranga-Mahatmyam" will give fuller particulars.) 
24 
of the Emotion of Peace and the treasure of the serene, according to the bent of their own minds. Why say much here? It matters not. The universe is not without an Isvara'; the fourteen witnesses2 appointed by Him watch everything. 
Surely, even if envy and other bad passions by chance enter the minds of the wise, they disappear as quickly as they rise, like the lightning-flash. 
24. Seized with envy, may men droop their heads down and remain silent at the first mention of this work, but the self-same persons (on hearing a few words of this work) shall nod their heads, their 
Supreme Lord. 
(8) Mind. 
1. 
2. 
(1) The Sun. 
(2) 
Moon. 
(9) God of Death. 
(3) 
Wind. 
(10) 
Day. 
(4) 
>> Fire. 
(11) Night. 
(5) 
Ether. 
(12) 
Dawn. 
(6) 
Water. 
(13) Dusk. 
35 
(7) 
Earth. 
(14) Duty. 
ef. आदित्यचन्द्रावनिलोनलश्च द्यौर्भूमिरापो हृदयं यमश्च । 
अहश्च रात्रिश्व उभे च संध्ये धर्मश्च जानाति नरस्य वृत्तं ॥ 
25 
body thrilling through like the cluster of Kadamba' flowers, blossoming at the first appearance of Winter. Then, though they half-close their eyes for shame, they suddenly lift their heads up and extol of their own accord the elegance of our 
work. 
Or :- 
Let it be that these men part not with their envy and let their hearts burn with malice. In any case:- 
25. Ousted we are not by the lovers of the Histrionic Art which the high-souled Bharata ordained for the good of the world, -Art2, the essence of which is indicated by the three letters of the alphabet,,, constituting his name, and which stand respectively for Thought, Music' and Action5. 
1. A kind of tree (said to put forth buds at the 
roaring of thunder-clouds.) 
2 The Science of Music which is the auxiliary to 
Sāma-Vêda. 
3. भाव, 4. राग, 5. ताल. 
26 
Nati.-Be it so, my Lord! Still how shall we in spite of our vigilance fulfil our promise, when so many are our opponents, so learned1 in several of the sciences and eager to pick holes in us? 
Sutradhara.-Ah, 
thou extoller of others' virtue ! Why so much regard for numerical superiority? Or perhaps, some indulge in putting endless questions, just to make doubly sure of what they already know; probably thou art one of them,-never mind. Esteem only the purely intelligent persons. 
For:- 
26. One2, though gifted with several stained" kalās, decayeth gradually, but one though gifted with a single stainless' kalā, 
Also means:- 
1. Capable of only putting endless questions. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The Moon or a certain person. 
The decaying phases of the Moon or little knowledge in all the 64 arts. 
Chandra Kalā or full knowledge in one art. 
27 
attaineth the estate of Girisa'. 
Therefore gratifying the Lord Supreme through this Histrionic Art, commended by sages such as Parāsara and Vyāsa3,Art which would not countenance the ways of the wicked and which is of ancient practice, we shall make the audience so blest, all alert. 
(With suppliant hands and humility). 27. Oh, ye learned savants of the Histrionic Art! ye shall now be all steady and all attentive to witness the several connecting links' of this Drama, wherein, the hero of the play, Viveka, shall embark 
1. Siva or Eloquence in words. 
3. 
4 
26-cf. Drink deep or touch not the Pierian Spring. A little learning is a dangerous thing; 
The author of the Smriti of the same name and the father of Vyasa. 
The reputed author of Brahma sutras, Maha- 
bharata etc. 
मुख, प्रतिमुख, कल्प, अवमर्श, उपसंहार, उपक्षेप. In this sloka the whole plot of the play is briefly indicated. 
28 
on his enterprise', (to accomplish Móksha for Jiva), shall attempt to put down his enemies, shall create an infinite longing for liberation3, shall practice Yoga to please Murāri1 thereby, and shall bring about the consummation to Jiva of the joy of the Brahman". 
(Behind the curtain). 
28. The endeavours of the vicious are thwarted like darkness dispelled by the 
1. पुरुषनिःश्रेयससाधनस्वमत प्रकाशनरूपे बीजारम्भसमन्वयात्मके 
-The argument of the first Act. 
2. निःश्रेयसप्राप्तिविरुद्ध बाह्यमतभङ्गोयोगे बिन्दुयत्नसमन्वयरूपे— 
The argument of the second Act. 
3. The arguments of the third to the eighth acts, 
both inclusive. 
4. Murari - The Enemy of the demon Mura - Vishnu. The argument of the ninth act-anЯसमन्वयरूये 
5. The argument of the tenth act-NE- 
समन्वयरूपे. 
6. When applied in the case of Viveka, this means 
the enterprise of Mahamoha, etc. 
29 
rays of the sun by the performance1 of this Drama enacted by experts so as to suit the occasion,-performance not conflicting with the ways of the virtuous. Sutradhara.-(Listening with joy). 
1 
3. 
4 
Lady! Hear this well;-This song introducing the actors indicateth our goal as well as that of the Mumukshu'. 
6 
29. This far-sighted self, as well as Vivêka is capable of vanquishing respectively wicked rival actors and Mahāmôha. 
(Behind the curtain). 
"When I, wearing the hard and sweet sugar-cane bow, and the fragrant vernal flower-shafts in my hand, am alive, and 
Also means practice of Karmānusbṭhāna in the case of Prapanna. 
Other meanings: -(1) Expert actors (2) Prapannas 
(3) The Sun. 
Also means-Karma prescribed for the different Varnāṣramas. 
Also means-The sun not transgressing the prescribed bounds in the sky. 
5. One longing for Bliss. 
6 
Means:-Sutradhara.. 
30 
inspire terror to my enemy-hosts, who is this cursed member of the dramatic troupe that longeth from the side of our enemy, for something not fit to be mentioned before our sovereign Lord, Mahāmôha, the Ruler of the minds of all Dêvas, Asuras, sages and men, the partner in life of Durmati,' and the great actor in the theatre of war?". 
Sutradhara (Looking round in fear and 
confusion). 
Lady! Who is yon fellow coming attended, with eyes reddened, with boundless anger? I now see to my dismay: 
3 
30. That this is no other than Kāma, the guardian-angel of the chief goal of life of those who uphold, Dharma, Artha and Kāma, the impediments to the attainment of Moksha. 
1. Evil sense. 
2. Duty or works. 
3. 
Wealth or goods. 
4. Passion. When personified, this is Cupid. 5. Bliss.31 
31. It is this Kāma that reduced the manliness of Mahêsvara by just one-half, that chastiseth those who scoff at Passion, the Third End of life. Facing us cometh this flower-weaponed Kāma, leaning his throbbing arm on Rati' who walketh with an amorous, sportive gait. 
Therefore we shall withdraw quickly and conceal ourselves from this mortal world, where Cupid's festivals are in full swing and in tune with the current season, and deliberate what should be done later. 
(Ereunt). 
[Preface ends.] 
(Enter Kama, reclining his arm on Fasanta, and accompanied by his sweetheart). 
1. Lord Siva, through the influence of Kama had to transform himself to a form, half-man, 
2. 
half-woman, and is known as Ardhanartsvara. Goddess of Love and Wife of Kama. 
3. Spring. 
32 
wearing the 
Kama. (Repeating "When I, 
hard and sweet sugar-cane-bow, etc.") 
Ah, thou disgrace to the Bharata race! 
32. What quarter in, will timid Vivêka hide, Shot by arrow-glances of the dames 
[blue-lotus-eyed,. 
Whose bow-brows vie with lovely creepers" 
[charms, 
Glances aiming at minds tender, besmeared [with lustful conquering charms? 
Vasanta.-(Aside). 
What vain castles in the 
air doth this insolent Kāma build? Though I am counted as one among the conductors of the Archirādi-mārga,2 my long friendship with Kāma, I am not, all of a sudden, able to sever. 
(Aloud) Friend, Fish-bannered Kāma ! 
1. Vasanta or the Spring being one of the seasong in Uttarayana,-one of the conductors of the virtuous to Moksha. 
2. The way to Moksha by which virtuous men 
are conducted. 
33 
True! I shall inaugurate thy great festival, which bringeth victory to our great King Mahāmôha and driveth Vivêka 
away. 
Look there:- 
33. In spring do sport lustful lovers, who have the bees hovering over the blossomed blue lilies worn on their tufts, who hold in their arms golden-syringes and who have disordered forelocks which are besineared with saffron-paste drenched by water driblets, diffusing the fragrance of musk, emanating from the leathersprinklers, pressed by damsels' hands. 
Kama. Very well, Vasanta! This is in our favor. This vile Vivêka is in every way vanquished almost, for, this great festival is begun in the regions bordering the Kaveri, before which the places of diversion in Svarga1 pale. 
1. 
34. Here we see the Kaveri, which aboun- 
The abode of the Devas (Immortals.)-the Hindu paradise. 
s. s. 3 
34 
deth in full-blown lotuses,-Kāveri which spreadeth her freshes, overflowing her either banks, and filling the several streamlets branching off, and watering the adjacent lands,-Kāveri which looketh mossy with the daily-bathing sportive Chola-damsels' tresses, and which seemeth smiling with white swan-pair's1 presence. 
Rati. My Lord! This great festival lacketh its usual eclat, for, troubled is my mind at the thought that for some inexplicable reason the invincible and persevering Viveka is the enemy of our Lord Mahāmôha! 
Kama.--Ah, thou simpleton! Ah, thou life of Kāma! thou presiding deity of damsels ! How is it that when thou shouldst rejoice at the gain of a mighty foe, thou with fiickleness natural to women, praisest the 
1. The presence of white swan-pairs i.e., husband and wife in the Kaveri makes one fancy that the river is smiling. Sanskrit rhetoricians concede a white colour to smiles and the Hamsa's (Swan's) colour being also white, the river is said to be smiling. 
glory of Viveka ? 
35 
Look here:- 
35. Was not even Siva, of the mighty Meru-bow, with fire-shafts accompanied by high-wind, for a moment unable to transgress the mandates of me, whose hand holdeth the charming sugarcane-bow, and whose flower-shafts are fixed in the beemade bow-string? 
Vasanta. --Madam! True! Take this not for a joke. The musquito can never the elephant's foe be, or perhaps, ignorant thou art of the world's ways. Thy lover's heroic exploits are known throughout the world. 
For:- 
36. Sarasvati, the first Vêdhāh3 beareth in his tongue, full of the chant of the Vêdas; to a feminine form, Siva's left side was 
1. The golden mountain. 
2. The goddess of learning. 3. The four-faced Demiurge. 
4. Ardhanarisvara (See n. 1, p. 31.) 
36 
transformed; even the supreme Vishnu1 was under the sway of cowherdesses. How then shall others escape the torments of Kāma ? 
Kama.Well, 
opportunely. 
Vasanta! Thou speakest 
37. Shall Viveka face me, when I oppose him with the flower-shafts lent by thee, to bring the whole universe under the sway of young damsels ? 
Rati. Forsooth, my Lord! But my mind is still perturbed at the thought, when and what the persevering Viveka, safely installed in the invulnerable strong fortress of Vairagya and guarded by the ever vigilant ministers, Sama3, Dama' himself a matchless warrior, may do? 
etc, 
1. The reference is to Lord Krishna's dalliance 
with the Gôpis. 
2. Dispassion. 
3. 
Control of the five external senses. 
4. 
do. do. the internal sense. 
37 
Kama.-Ah, timid lady! Enough of thy 
excessive doubts. Thou seemest to be deceived by the simple fools devoted to our enemies, and so dost not understand the greatness of thy own party. 
Look for a while on the victorious weapons known in all the worlds three, of thy beloved, the conqueror of the universe! 38. Is not my premier bow the matchless frame of damsels, whose slender waist doth not exceed my wrist-hold, whose constant beauty is the bow-string, and whose earreaching and daintily curved eyes are the beautiful shafts ? 
Further- 
39. If the melodious names of the sweet prattling damsels be but heard, it driveth all demeanour to a distance; good-bye it biddeth to peace of mind; modesty, it doth destroy; dispassion, it doth exterminate; what else will it not do? 
Vasanta. Surely, this is a proposition a fortiori. Even the casual mention or hearing of 
38 
a woman's name causeth mental distraction.. 
40. Let alone the fact that the thought of women and their glances, prattles, etc, in an admiring spirit, driveth dispassion away to a distance. The thought of them, even in a carping spirit, doth surely drive dispassion away. 
Besides- 
41. The attempt to restrain the mind, full of passion and wandering in the various woodlands of the senses, purely by one's own effort', is as impossible as that of trying to bind the Airāvata2 with a lotus-fibre. 
Rati. My lord! Thou shalt so ply thy prowess 
as to evade the ken of the great yogis, who are able to break the strong old illusion that body and soul are identical. 
Kama.(Laughing) My love! Methinks the fear of thy eyes hath seized thy heart 
1. Also means without God's grace. 
2. Indra's elephant. 
3. Practicers of Yoga. 
39 
as well. Even the best of yogis shall be made by me to prostrate at the feet of the (young) maiden yogis-in-chief! 
42. Hast thou not heard (too) of a superior dual form, blended in one', by (means of) my apparently tender but really hard missiles,-form, the half of which formeth the armour of the other, the half life of which dependeth on the half life of the other? 
Rati. My Lord! Thy greatness is well known to me, but I am distressed, like the plantain (tree) shaken in a heavy gale, to think when and what may befall us, through the force of our ever-persevering, farsightel foe, strong to command and counsel alike, favored by God, and aided by several co-operators, such as Yama," Niyama, etc. Well known it is that the 
3 
2 
1. The form referred to is Ardhanarişvara, See, 
n. 1, p. 31. 
2 
शरीरमाधनापेक्षं नित्यं यत्कर्म तद्यमः । 
3. नियमस्तु स यत्कर्म नित्यमागंतु साधनम् । 
23. The first two angas or means of attaining Yoga 
40 
power of knowledge bringeth about realisation of rare results, stretching unto Môksha itself! 
Kama.-(With sarcastic smile). 
Ah, thou simplteton and sweet prattler! 
Where is the scope for wisdom in the presence of me-thy beloved, whose flower-shafts fixed on the humming bee bowstring, have the universe for their target, and who is ever confident of victory? 
By what means can salvation be 
(possibly) secured (while I am)? Indeed the slenderness of thy waist is perhaps not evident in thy mind! 
(Smiling again in jest). 
Yes, my love! That, I See! I See !! 
The heaviness of thy breasts hath (evidently) obsessed thy brain (or mind) as well, or, perhaps thou art no exception to thoughtless talk, characteristic of charming women!41 
Look here! 
43. Incited by me, Krôdha' shall create infinite ignorance; this shall bring about failure of memory, which in turn shall obstruct the influence of intellect on Jiva; Jiva, bereft of intellect, shall fall into abysmal darkness and perish there. When it doth so matter, what shall stupid Vivêka do? 
Therefore Vivêka's ministers, Sama,2 Dama3 and others, shall never withstand the overwhelming might of our phalanx. By himself, invincible is Mahāmôha, whose left foot is planted on the diadems of all Dêvas and Asuras. A hyena is no equal to the Lion, the lord of beasts! 
44. Even the mightiest of foes shall, in due time, be discomfited by my weapons 
संगात्संजायते कामः कामात्क्रोधोऽभिजायते । क्रोधाद्भवति संमोहः संमोहात्स्मृतिविभ्रमः । 
43. 
cf. 
1. 
स्मृतिविभ्रंशाद्बुद्धिनाशो बुद्धिनाशात्प्रणश्यति ॥ 
Anger. 2 & 3. See n, 3 & 4 p. 36. 4. अरविन्दमशोकं च चूतं च नवमल्लिका । 
नीलोत्फलं च पंचैते पञ्चवाणस्य सायकाः । 
[Bh. Gi.] 
42 
five, which compare indeed with the weapons1 five of the Lord Supreme (Himself). 
45. Not to speak of the other Devas, the ever-penanceful Lord of Badarikāsrama Himself, who expoundeth before the assembly of sages the doctrines of Môksha, as acceptable as the Vedas, betrayeth his Vairagya by His thigh-posts, procreating the woman-jem Urvasi. 
Rati.-Husband dear! I take thy word for truth. Thy prowess never failed from over the First Maker down to the last worm. Still 
1. शङ्खं चक्रं गदा शार्ङ्ग ख 
2. 
Nārāyaya. 
3. The allusion here is: -When Narayana was practising severe austerities in Badarika rama, Indra, afraid of his position, sent down some of his nymphs to distract the penance of Narayana, who to put the nymphs to shame created from His thigh a woman who surpassed the nymphs in beauty. On seeing Urvasi (i.e., born of thigh), the nymphs went away, seeing their efforts fell fruitless against Narayana. 
43 
I have one thing more to ask of thee, not 
known to me yet. 
Kama. - What is that? 
Rati.-What is the cause of the enmity, as 
between the lion and the 
elephant, between Viveka and his party on the one 
side, and Mahāmôha and his party on the other ? 
Kama.Love mine! Thou shalt hear about this 
from the very beginning. 
46. The chaste lady named Buddhi' lived with Jiva. in the abode of Milaprakriti," and was ever devoted to him. She brought forth three sets of progeny from the triquality-bounded Jiva, each at a time, with The first of a quality preponderating. 
these is the set, Vivêka and his bandthe haters of worldly enjoyments, the second and third set is the joint family of Rāga and Moha1 combined. 
1. Intellect 2. The root cause of nature composed 
of the attributes, Satva, Rajas 
(Goodness, Passion and Inertia.) 
and Tamas 
3. Attachment. 4. Illusion. 
44 
In this triple family, Vivêka and Mabāmôha were respectively installed, as suzerain lords, by subjects akin to them in disposition. 
47. Of these, the wedded wife of Moha is Durmati,' with an eye ever adverse to Môksha, and the devoted wife of Viveka is Sumati,2 with an eye ever adverse to sense-lusts. 
Rati. And then? 
Kama.-Like the clan of Rakshasas co-operating with Asuras, Raga and others, having passion as their dominant trait fulfil the function of ministers to Mahāmôha, born of the race of Tamas and the Lord Paramount of Samsara. The race of Viveka, born of Satva, lacketh a large following and claimeth but few votaries in the world. Our progenitor Jiva, though by nature neutral, is now, through the influence of his wedded wife Buddhi, just at this moment inclined towards us, and this, the 
1. Evil mind. 2. Good mind. 
45 
ever wicked Viveka and his band brook not. Like the man of polemics defeating his own argument, not realising its weakness, these, unmindful of their own ruin, long to deprive Jiva of his temporal joys, along with us, who desire to advance those joys. They impute iniquities to Prakriti so long enjoyed by our progenitor Jiva and have so far, by some unknown means, succeeded in creating in him an aversion for the same, and they attempt to make him embark on a long never-to-return journey'. In this, Viveka and his brood illustrate the action of the mos: wicked Sugriva and Vibhishana, the respective lords of the Monkey and Rakshasa races who deserted their own kith and kin. Difficult it is to describe the state of Jiva, 
1. Archiradimarga. 
The allusion here is to Sugriva de rting his brother Valin, and Vibhishana hi brother Ravana, the two joining the side of Art Rama and thus bringing about the destructio. of their brothers. For fuller particulars, vide RamayanaKishkindha, and Yuddha, Kandas. 
46 
at the time when Viveka maketh such an 
attempt. 
48. Owing to the vile Viveka and his party, born-blind is this Jiva in discerning others' faults; foremost among the dumb in censuring others; stone-deaf in hearing others censured: practically effeminate in enticing others' wives: ignorant in influencing others; and abashed even to behold others. 
Therefore it is that we desire to exterminate them, rupturing all fraternity. We oppose them with the aid of Pravritti' Dharma, and they oppose us with the aid of Nivritti Dharma. Their clan, having Satva for its essence, shall soon be overpowered by ours, like the glow-worm by the sun's rays. 
49. Thus it was that love between the two brotherly families was lost, and enmity arose, owing to the difference in their 
1. Occupation. 
2. Renunciation. 
47 
respective prime inborn qualities. 
Are 
not the Devas and Asuras, born of the same Kasyapa' Prajapati, life-long enemies? Rati.-Hush, Heaven forbid! 2 
After all, the sons despoil the father of his joys; otherwise why would brothers plot each other's ruin? 
My Lord! Is not peace that averteth abhorrent war possible between them and ye ? 
Kama.-Ah, simpleton! Peace is impossible 
under any circumstances whatsoever. 
1. 
2. 
50. The virtuous and the vicious offend each other merely by the difference in their respective inherent qualities. How can even the lapse of myriads of Kalpas bring about a reconcilation between the two? 
51. 
Vivêka's partisans and ours are of different mould in each Jiva, and are 
The father of Indra. 
Lit. शान्तं पापं, ज्ञान्तं पापं. 
A day of Brahma, or one thousand yugas, being a period of 432 million years of mortals and measuring the duration of the world. For details see Bhagavadgitā by Govindacharya. 
48 
diametrically opposed to each other. 
If 
we two meet in one and the same subject, oh, sweet lady!, we either finish them or be finished. 
Even for parley, peace is impossible with our enemies-the votaries of Nārāyana, and us--the votaries of Artha and Kama. Even if, perchance, peace be brought about by some effort extraordinary, our King Mahamoha, expert in destroying all enemies, shall brook it not. Myself, a matchless warrior, shall never subscribe to it. (The keenest hunger of) a tiger shall never (drive it to) feed on grass. 
Rati.-How have those exterminators of the race plotted to destroy mighty warriors such as ye? 
Kama.-Ah, timid lady! This state-secret ought not to be divulged, particularly to 
women. 
Rati.-(Taking Kama by the hand). Dear Lord! Oath on me, oath on thy dear friend Vasanta, thou shalt disclose the state-secret in all its integrity (to me). 
Vasanta. (Aside). 
49 
How to disclose it here? Hard, indeed, are the undetermined ways of Providence to surmount ! 
52. (Aloud). Friend, Kāma! The plot of the enemies' of Mahāmôha, capable only of rearing castles in the air, shall now be exposed by us-their enemies. 
Kama.-If so, hear me speak. There is Nivritti- 
Dharma promoted by several perverse doctrines, disavowal of selfness in Karmas etc, all propounded by Vivêka-the foremost of fools, and practised by some austere philosophers plodding in the barren field of Upanishads and longing to exterminate our race by witchery. It is said that when Jiva is thus intent on NivrittiDharma, great mishaps befall him such as blindness, deafness, impotence, lameness, dumbness etc, in (the event of) discerning the fault of others. By way of revenge that selfsame Fiend of Nivritti-Dharma is going to prevail on Jiva to bring about a re-union with Buddhi. Therefore, out 
1. Viveka and his party. 
S. 8. 4 
50 
of this re-union, one, intently hateful towards our race, with an appearance sweet and serene, a Brahmarakshas', otherwise known as Para-bhakti', the exterminators of all sense-lusts, shall be born. 
For:- 
53. Buddhi, the housewife of Jiva-the progenitor (with her) of the two racesundergoing endless modifications, accordant with the preponderance of the three' qualities, one over another, yet (intrinsically) remaineth faithful to the same Jiva, and engendereth, in right" time, the horrid Para-bhakti, more hidious-made by the chanting of vicious Mantras that eventuate (at last) in the deluge of terrific Moksha. 
54. Then, this Para-bhakti, characterised by renunciation etc, (on the one hand) 
1. Goblin. 2. Supreme Devotion to God. 3. भैमरथि - सप्तत्यात्सप्तमे वर्षे सप्तमे मासि सप्तमी । 
रात्रि मरथी नाम सर्वप्राणिभयंकरी ॥ 
4. Satva, Rajas, Tamas. 
5. जायमानकटाक्षादि सन्धुक्षिताचार्यप्रसादानन्तरकाले 
6. 
Ashtaksharî-Mantra, etc.51 
and faithful devotion to the Supreme Lord (on the other hand) is to practise severe penance, involving the inhibiting of all the senses. Pleased by this penance, Sri Janārdana's Mercy is to fashion a demon, surpassing the strength of myriads of Kaitabhāsuras2, to be her (Bhakti's) servant -(stops suddenly half uttering this). Vasanta.-(Aside) "This (demon) can be no other than Sankalpa-Suryodayathe extinguisher of our race must be the close of the sentence. I shall however conclude it otherwise. 
39 
(Aloud). The rest must be difficult 
to mention. 
Rati.-(With fear and confusion). 
My Lord! Protect me, protect me. 
(Embraces her husband). 
Kama. (Embracing firmly and gesturing a 
never-before-enjoyed pleasure). 
H 
1. Lit-One full of mercy on all - Epithet of Sri 
Narayana. 
In Kama's eyes the name to be mentioned is an Asura, as he is going to destroy his clan. Kaîtabha is the demon who stole away the 
Vedas from Brahmā. 
52 
55. (Aside). With this timid and turbulent embrace of the tremulous-eyed Rati, which causeth her bangles to break, throweth her pearl-necklace out of place, brusheth away all afflictions, and produceth every pleasure though passing, the soul inward spurneth all notions of the duality of our dual frames ! 
(Aloud)-Dear Rati, the (lady) love of the foremost warrior of Mahāmôha's forces! fear not! take heart, take heart! This (that I spoke) meaneth nothing more than a tradition invented by the amateur travellers in Upanishads, to beguile the tediousness of the journey, in the manner the juggler performeth the trick of a town being swallowed. 
56. Chandra', Indra' and others, who denounce (acts of) ravishment, themselves swerve from (the path of) rectitude. The 
1. The Moon-the allusion is to the seduction of 
Tara-the wife of Brihaspati. 
2. The King of the Devas-the allusion is to the 
seduction of Ahalya-the wife of Gautama. 
53 
moment my bow is bent, resounding with the rows of humming bees, who then can to the doors of Virakti bend-let alone our powerful cabinet ministers. 
whose essential 
57. How shall Môha, (strength) is made up of the different squadrons of indifference, indolence, slumber, etc, and who possesseth tremendous power to eclipse knowledge, be conquered' by any body? 
Rati. (Aside). By accident my lord's utterance 
sounds equivocal. 
(Aloud). May prosperity attend our 
great king! 
Vasanta. Ah, thou wife of Kāma! 
58. Fear not, for, so long that Moha and his followers are well armed, shall Jíva, 
1. There is also the implication that by no means 
Môha would conquer. 
This utterance is ambiguous and another meaning implied in verse 58 is.-The moment Môha and his partisans are no more, Jiva regaineth his innate nature अपहतपाप्मत्व, etc and shall attain liberation through the influence of Virakti. 
54 
covetous of Prakritic' association, shake himself off from the influence of Virakti P 
Rati (Aside). Alas! Vasanta's utterance soun- 
deth ambiguous. 
(Aloud). My Lord! Is Vivêka bereft of sense, as also his ministers Sama, Dama and others? If Jiva discardeth Prakriti,' the finale for them and for us, would 
seem to be the same! 
Kama.-Rightly so. But this sinful (brood) 
Vivêka and others, jealous of the joy of our race, play at games that tend to extinguish both the races, under the very nose of Jiva; blunt indeed are they of their wits as not to perceive their own ruin thereby. These ignorant people shall not, by any means, be successful in their enterprise. 
For- 
59. The irresistible force of Karma shall 
put life into us again, albeit slain in battle. 
1. Body or nature i.e., matter. 
55 
We shall revive even like Sugriva's famous' warriors of old. 
(Behind the curtain). 
ye 
the 
Who is this perverse person that reckoneth us as sinners, 
as sinners, who wish the greatest good for all? Thou fellow, immodest and ill-behaved! We, who subject. all our actions to the Mercy of Madhu's conqueror, strive to overthrow wicked, who put the progenitor (Jiva) in unshakable shackles. We also strive to bring about eternal bliss to Jiva after liberating him from all miseries and even then keep our race sapient under the influence of (Jiva's) Buddhi. 
Do not the Upanishads proclaim thus ?:60. Sri Narayana,-even by the mask of Bhakti or Prapatti donned by the actor1. The Monkey and Bear warriors of Sugriva, who died in the battles at Lanka, especially in the great havoc caused by Kumbhakarna, regained their lives through the boon of Indra after the termination of the war. 
2. Vishnu 
56 
Jiva delighted,-Jíva who playeth the different rôles' in the melodrama of Samsāra,doth lift him to the utmost eminence, doth make him, through His Mercy, His peer in all respects, save Sri-Lordship and Cosmos creationship. 
Hence :- 
61. As sure as anything is the fact that the great fame of having overthrown our foes Môha etc, the high duty of protecting our father (Jiva) (from falling into Samsāra), and the joy of having accomplished our ambition-these shall anon come to us of their own accord. 
Kama.-(Looking with jear and scorn). 
My 
love! Yonder cometh Viveka himself, facing us, the head of all the adversaries of Mahamoha, accompanied by his co-partner 
in life-Sumati. 
62. This Viveka, ever defending Sama, 
1. Birth, youth, dotage, etc. 
2. 
3. 
श्रियः पतित्वं = Being the husband of Sri. 
Being the cause of the comos. 
1. 
57 
Dama, and other virtues, monopolising the secrets1 of Mantras like the Ashtāksharî, and desirous of demolishing Môha, restraineth all desire for sense-lusts, maketh researches in Vedanta, consulteth the rules relating to Moksha, and studieth BhagavadGîtā with unswerving devotion. 
Further :- 
63. This Sun of Vivêka, augmenting the lustre of Sumati, to whose (Sumati's) heart the truth about God and soul is most near,Vivêka who again is full of the ardent love for Moksha, though in great prosperity, doth now attain the feet of Vishnu, on Whom he leaneth, after scattering the (twofold) mist of Ahamkāra viz. selfness in body and selfness in soul. 
Also means-Keeping his councils secret". 
The double meaning implied in verse 63. is -The sun, 
now increasing the lustre of the quarter opposite to the West, (East), though rising, is still invested by the excessive redness of the dawn, doth now clear the mist, and reacheth the sky. 
58 
It is therefore not meet that we should unmask ourselves to our enemies too soon, and without proper precaution. 
(Thus ereunt Kama with his wife and friend). 
Mediate Interlude ends. 
(THEN ENTER KING AND SUMATI). 
King. (Vivêka)-(Musing). Love mine! 
Hearest thou the rant of this fellow Kama, the source of the noxions thicket of endless sins, the seat of boundless conceit ? 
See, how he scorneth at us-the very persons who strive to obliterate all sins. 
Or :- 
64. A person void of sense perceiveth faults in others, though they exist not; similarly perceiveth he in himself virtues that exist not. This frailty cometh as the effect of Môhas' eye-salve. 
59 
* 
Sumath. Aryaputra! Do not ugly-faced persons 
impute their ugliness to the fault of the mirror, which by nature is clean? 
King.-Forsooth, my Queen! 
Thou kennest things as they are and speakest as thou kennest. 
Further :- 
65. Thou art one, free of all faults and art ever intent on compassing infinite supreme Bliss to man. Thou art endowed with Guna,' Alankāra, Bhāva, and Rasa, like the work of a good poet. 
2 
(Again musing). 
3 
4 
Alas, My love! 
these Kāma, Krodha, Lôbha," and their 
*Lit: Noble son. 
This term is usually used by 
ladies when accosting their husbands. 
When applied to Poets' work.- 
1. Diction etc. 
2. 
Rhetoric. 
3. Gesture. 
4. Emotion. 
1. 
2. 
When applied to Sumati.- 
Understanding, retentiveness, etc. 
Ornaments. 3 Thought. 4. Attachment. 
5. Greed. 
60 
ilk who divert themselves in tormenting the abiding Jíva, pose themselves as the upholders of righteousness, and look upon us, as the augmenters of vice,-us who strive to compass Moksha for Jíva and to draw down (upon him) the merciful look of the Lord Divine-the natural friend to one and all alike,-merciful look, the panacea to all persons agonised by the anguish of Samsāra. Alas! Queer is this buffoon's bluff! Never mind, mark my great vow, for earning the Almighty's blessings. Its carrying out solely dependeth on thee. 
66. Ah! Beautiful lady! By this vow, so auspiciously taken, I draw courage through the mercy of Madhu's foe' and by keeping away from Jíva his foes, external and internal, I will plant him firmly in Yoga, will divest him of the influence of both Pāpa1 and 
1. Vishnu. 
2. Infidels and Perverts. 
3. 
Lust, Passion, Anger. etc. 
5. 
4. Vice. 
Virtue-According to Visishtadvaita philosophy both virtue and Vice are impediments to attain Emancipation.61 
Punya and will vouchsafe all blessedness to him by making him attain the Parabrahman. 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! How is this eternal, stainless, highly-blissful and self-luminons Jíva, whose nature is self-evident to all mankind, consigned to the Ocean of misery, awful-made by great waves of sin dashing, and agitated by the resistless Ahamkāra, by the mephistophelian Mahāmôha, Māna, Mada, Matsara, etc.? 
3 
5 
King. My love! Keen perceiver of subtilties! 
Can the Evident be denied or the Agamic contents rejected? Just see this :- 
67. In this universe we have seen objects deprived of their natural quality by accidents of contact with some other object, 
1. Supreme Lord. 
2. Phil. The fallacy that body and soul are one 
and the same. 
3. Conceit. 4. Pride. 5. Jealousy. 6. Vedic. 
7. The formless clean mirror reflects the image of a flower when the latter is held before a mirror. 
red 
62 
and the accident passing, the object springing back to its original quality. Similarly, this eternal Samsara enshroudeth Jíva,' through the influence of eternal rescience, yclept Karma, and releaseth him the moment it vanisheth. 
Sumati. True indeed! But how is it the all-benevolent Lord of Sri, hath so long neglected Jiva tormented by unbearable manifold miseries ? 
King. Hast thou not heard that Jiva who biddeth for Samsāra, by the bonds of nescience-(Eternal Karma) was bidden away by the Almighty for the very reason that He bid for Samsara and that the self same Almighty will extricate him on an opportunity lending itself? 
For :- 
68. The Lord, whose impartiality is evident in His equal solicitude to placate 
कर्मोपाधिवशात्मोहा- 
1. नित्यनिर्मलमहानन्दस्वरूपोऽपि जीवः 
द्यावृतो दुःखभाग्भवतितद्विगमे च आविर्भूतस्वाभाविकरूपो भवति । 
63 
both Sport and Mercy, typified as Lilā1 and Dayā,' working ever at cross purposes, (the Lord) improveth upon the accident of merit gotten by His own Grace, and lifteth us, the fallen, in the manner of the worm etching out (unconsciously, as it were) auspicious letters (on a piece of timber). 
Further :- 
69. From the ever-flowing river of Merit and Demerit, incapable of avoidance, diversion or crossing, the Lord lifteth us the fallen, and rejoiceth. 
1. Lila-There is no exact English equivalent to this. But Lila is connoted by the desire of the Lord to indulge Himself in the sport of making souls take birth and rebirth, etc. in Samsara. See Introduction to Lives of Azhvars 
by Govindacharya on word Lila. 
2. Mercy. 
3. 
Called the Guna-kshata-lipi Nyaya -The worn is a wood-insect. The sense implied in verse (68) is-The Lord punishing us Sinners, through Lila, Himself imparteth virtue to one of the manifold Karmas through Mercy and thus protecteth us. 
64 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! My mind is perplexed by the serious doubt, as to how one can attain Moksha in the infinite future, when infinite past hath merely lapsed in 
an 
vain ? 
King.-Queen mine! The consort of Viveka as thou art, how is it that thou dost indulge in such doubts as if thou art ignorant of the ways of logical reasoning? 
Or :- 
70. Even the sages still debate as to the true cause of this amidst so many (principles or) things, such as, Time, Nature, Fate, Accident, etc. 
This here is to be investigated :- 
71. All Vedantic' schools agree in thinking that in this cycle of Karma and Nescience, incessantly and strangely whirling, each Jiva cometh to ripen differently in its own due season. Catching the right moment in this ripening-by the First 
1. Except Charvaka - The materialist who holds that 
body itself is the soul. 
65 
Teacher' caught-the enlightened2 Jîva thus (caught) reapeth in plenty all the riches stretching up to Moksha. 
72. In the manner of the Daughters of Vidêha, Jiva, confined in the body of Lanka, girt by the sea of Samsāra, ruled by the proud ten-headed demon of mind with the senses ten, (Jiva, like her, Vaidehi) pineth, thus humbled. Anon by a Hanuman-like Guru is (Jiva) instructed of the Truth (of God, etc.) 
known as 
73. In this carnal body Brahmapura, having several portals of sins countless, Jiva, unrestrained of action, being incentived by a will free (-given) but kept in limits by 
by a Providence Almighty, is thus fast bound to the power (Ha of the senses, even like a demented king influenced by the advice of his evil 
1. God is spoken of as the First Teacher. 
2. Jiva doth feel a longing to investigate the Truth about God, the means of attaining Him and Beatitude. (Tatva, Hita, Purushartha). 
3. Sita, or the daughter of Videha's king, Janaka. 
8. 8. 5 
66 
ministers, each striving to contrive hisown objective. 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! Though tormented by 
this flesh (body), like one lodged in a fire-begirt lodging, how is it that the listless Jiva desireth not to rid himself of this body? 
King.-Eh My love, all-wise! It is no easy task to cross the great ocean of attachment. 
74. Like the well-polished gem-set wall, the soul inviolate, beareth on it the most wonderful picture, made up of the stable and unstable', tri-colored,' distinctly limned by the Six-Attributed Painter, with His tri-qualitied brush. 
Sumatl.-(With grief) If so, how is it that the most beloved Buddhi doth not remind her mad husband? 
1. The cosmos composed of moving and stationary 
objects: 
2. Three colours and three attachments, ga, 
वित्तेषणा, दारेषणा.. 
3. 
God of the attributes Jñana, Sakti, etc. 4. Satva, Rajas, Tamas. 
67 
King-My quick-witted love! Buddhî also, self-luminons though she be, is for the nonce practically dormant. 
For- 
75. Like the lotus fading at the setting sun and like the charmless night by the Rāhu'-eclipsed snow-beamed Moon, our Mother Buddhi, lovely lady! fadeth for the time being, remaining inert, struck out of her luminosity, resembling soul itself-her Lord, bereft of attributes, by Māyic2 contact. 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! Profoundly pitiable is this bonded state of Jiva along with Buddhi! Thou shalt now elucidate for me at length, the means by which Jiva,-ever so much misery-molested, shall attain Moksha. May I have peace of mind thus! 
King My ever well-wishing Queen! I shall now dwell in detail on the means of attaining Beatitude and in doing so, shall be 
1. 
A serpent named Rahu is said to swallow the moon during an eclipse. 2. Illusion. 
68 
only reminding thee of what thou already. knowest. 
76. Samsāra, hardened by hoarded sins, hard to stem, is the great curse of all Jivas and past palliation. Its only Deliverer is the Lord's Free Will-Power,' acting in concert with His causeless Mercy and it (Will-Power) gratifieth itself, by pitching upon a cause (for Karma-cessation). Sumati.-Aryaputra! If that cause is fit for my hearing, may it please thee to inform me of the same. 
King. My love, so pure of tongue! Thou shalt hear the gist of the subtle truth. 
77. Full of Lust, Envy and Pride, the soul like the child, is, obsessed by several spirits. By the gracious look of a Royal Personage, Veda-famed, it (soul) entereth the way of the Wise. 
78. To the soul, soaked in the nectareous look of the sinless Teacher, providentially 
1. Sankalpa 2. May mean either Sri-Narayana 
or ācharya. 
69 
obtained, the many pure attributes,' pure knowledge, etc, sprout up, making for boundless bliss. 
And then- 
79. While the soul embodied, is on all sides pulled by cords of evil-smelling past pleasures of Svarga, fraught with fall inevitable,-brimfull Bhakti (love) in Brahma High the Goal,-the milky Sea of mercy, heaving high, springeth, influenced by his (soul's) previous birth's good Karma. 
In the interim, this other feast fit for universal suffrage superveneth (viz Prapatti or surrender to God). 
2 
80. With thee for my wife, I shall, at the time of Bhakti's fruition, myself perform this peculiar (feast) sacrifice, no fruit expecting. The manifold attributes led by Sama, Dama, etc, shall be the officiat 
1. Such as Sama, Dama, etc. 
2. 
A Vedic feast literally (Adhvara) and is considered a sacred feast; hence is a sacrifice. 
70 
ing-Ritviks' of this sacrifice. For reasons beyond our ken, the Eternal Lord doth become the goal of the offering of ātman', and then shuffling off the shackles of karma, the bonded Jiva-(Pasu3) doth get 
unbound. 
Thou hast to consider this as well: 
81. The Divine Lord of Sri, whose power is eternally manifest, in Creation, Duration and Dissolution of the universe, performeth through His Mercy a supernatural and matchless conversion on Jiva that performeth the momentary sacrifice of self-surrender and resignation, and so despatcheth his sins that they return 
never. 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! When shall the above described state of Supreme Bliss become the joy of Jiva ? 
1. Officiating Priests in a sacrifice. 
2. Soul. 
3. 
The animal sacrificed in a yaga. 
4. 
As opposed to the long time taken for Bhakti.71 
King. My Queen, versed in the knowledge 
of the triple realms! 
We have thus far to rejoice at the fact that rescue from Samsāra hath somehow become possible to Jiva,-plunged in the main of misery intolerable,-by (the authority of) Revelation as well as Reason. 
82. A blessed being, graduating along the scale of Sri-Lord's Mercy-led by Teachers. taintless, reigneth in the abode of Supreme Bliss bedecked with suddhasatva.3 
Further:- 
83. Sure it is that the Divine Lord's Mercy, unaffectable even by post-Surrender sins befalling, curbeth His wilful Lila, imparteth to Jivas a taste for karmas, congenial and inductive to the Lord Divine, 
1. जायमानकटाक्षादिक्रमेण । 
2. गोपुरमण्डपादिना । 
3. Refulgent matter. 
72 
1. 
or 
and bringeth about infinite bliss now o hence.2 
84. Free of all obstacles, the Divine Road of the Mercy of Madhu's Foe,3 leadeth one, as revealed in the Vedas, to the city of Paramapada,'-the Mercy-Road, thick shaded by auspicious attributes, (such as Sausilya")-the Averter of the glare Māyā,6-exempt from sins of Rajôguna and, by the Tāpatrayās", unaffected. 
2. 
of 
At the annihilation of this body in the case of 
Prapannas. 
At the termination of (a Karma already begun) in the case of Bhaktas. 
3. Vishnu the sayer of the demon Madhu. 
Another meaning of verse (84) is--Free of all thorns on the way, the Path of firm belief in the Mercy of Madhu's Foe, leadeth one to the royal road leading into the city of Ayodhya unassailed by anybody,-Path cool with the beautiful shade which alleviates the glare of the Sun,-path free of all dust and heat. 4. Abode of Supreme Bliss. 
disposition. 
8. 
आद्यात्मिकादि. 
6. Illusion. 
5. 
Accessible 
7. Passion. 
73 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! Methinks that thy word that Jíva, replete with sins innumerable, shall from the ocean of misery be rescued, 
may but be a hope held forth like the toy offered to a crying child! 
King. My lady charming! thou believer in the Revelations! Follow not the lead of falsity. Art thou not Sumati? Hast thou ever heard of the fallibility of the Revelations, or that of the Lord's promise to protect His devotees? Here is convincing statement for thee. 
1. 
2. 
oath 
85. Sumati! Oath upon Fate', upon thee, oath upon me; if only thou resign thy slumber and look with eyes wide awake, thou shalt thyself perceive the greatness of the Will of Demon Mura's Victor2, so swift evinced in rescuing the loudly wailing Gajendra" from agony, 
Lot, or God's free-gift of Grace, or Will. 
Vishnu. 
3 The ailusion here is to the Gajendra Upakhyana in Sri Bhagavata which briefly stated is as follows:- 
Once the head of a herd of Elephants tormented 
74 
caught as he was warring, by the crocodile Ahamkāra'. Why, to champion the oppressed is a matter of course. 
For :- 
86. Be a refugee humble, or be he proud or be he culprit or non-default it matters not, for, he is eligible for protection, as far as possible. This is the great ethical canon, firmly established by the highly virtuous, such as Visvamitra', 
by excessive thirst went to a pool of water to quench its thirst, when lo! an alligator caught hold of the foot of the elephant which, knowing of no other protector, appealed loudly to the Mercy of the First Cause of the universe (Adimúlam). The Lord, loth to tarry a second longer, rode upon His vehicle Garutman and appeared at the scene of trouble. sent He His Discus which cut in twain the head of the alligator; and the liberated elephant was no other than a great Gandharva or allegorically Jiva, liberated from the agonies of Samsåra. 
cf. नक्राक्रान्ते करीन्द्रे. ग्राहग्रस्ते गजेन्द्रे, etc. 
Fast 
1. The delusion that body and soul are identical. 2. A sage had to perform a sacrifice for which a human being as the victim. 
he required 
75 
the Dove, Sri Rāma, King Raghu, the Devapatnís, the crane Nālijangha, Brihaspati and several others. 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! Even the great Prajapati and others are worshipped by several votaries, whose ambition is Moksha. Such 
1. 
A king whom he entreated for this purpose would not part with his eldest son; similarly his wife would not part with her last son; the chance therefore fell to the lot of the middle son who was called Sunassêpha. This latter as a last resort took refuge under Visvamitra who eventually saved him. 
Kapôtôpākhyāna, (see Mahabharata.) 
2. Kākāsura was let off with his life by Sri Rama's Brahm-āstra, though the former offended at Sita's breast. When all the worlds would not give him protection against Brahm-astra, Rama spared his life by the mere fact of his falling at Rama's feet after vainly circuiting in all the worlds three. 
3. See Raghuvamsa for the story. 
4. 
Vedic story-"Deva vai tvashtaram" etc. 
5. See Yadavagiri-Mahatmya, 9th Adhyaya. 
6. The story of Indra being saved by Brihaspati- 
See Bhagavatam. 
76 
being the case, how is it that thou speakest of Sri's Lord alone as the granter of Moksha ? 
King-Oh my sharp-witted love! just think how exceptional forsooth is the greatness of Madhu's Victor! 
87. Firm faith in the Supreme as the Root of all Beings from Brahmā down to the worm, effecteth deliverance from Samsāra. But the numskull who, though aiming at Môksha, payeth worship to the innumerable lower divinities, is like him who hopeth to quench his thirst by dew-drops! 
A thousand suns may be drawn in a picture but would they dispel a dot of darkness ? 
88. The night of Prakriti, imposing aonic nescientic sleep on Jíva, can vanish only by the blaze of the sun of Sankalpa1 of our Lord, the Conqueror of Naraka.2 
1. Divine Will. 
2. 
Hell or the demon Naraka whom Lord Krishna 
killed, vide Sribhagavata-10th Skandha. 
77 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! Ever doth the mind of the Devas and the sages waver as to the knowledge of the exact relationship between the soul and the Lord High. But thou fixest thy mind on Sri-Narayana alone. How? King.-Queen mine! This decision is dependent 
on the Upanishads, interpreted by (the key of) several Smritis, Purānas and Upabrihmanās.1 The harmony subsisting between the Vêdas, the Brahmanas and Nārāyana is well known. 
89. The truth to be searched is Vishnu (i.e., Nārāyana) alone. The authorities are the Vedas alone. The True-perceivers are the Sātvic2 Brāhmanas3 alone. Thus judged are that these three do constitute a harmonious group. What use then of the other (lesser) deities who are but worms* by comparison? 
1. Those which exegetise the matter briefly touched 
upon in the Srutis. 
2. 
Peace-preponderant. 
3. The sacredotal class entrusted with the Vedas 
and their teaching and practising. 
4. 
In so far as their dependence on Sri Narayans 
is concerned. 
78 
Further:- 
90. If a sage Vyāsa, the arranger of the Vêdas, after reconnoitering all sciences divine, and subjecting them to severe ratiocination, solemnly declared thrice in a council of sages-by upraising his hands-the truth arrived at by him;-with him then for our authority, which other than Sri Nārāvana can pose as the Great Truth' ? 
The saying of the great sages is to the effect-"the way by which the great ones have gone is the best way." 
91. Logic hath no finality; the Vedasare found contentious; the authorities of the Rishis are mutually conflicting. Why mention other paltry utterances ? Thus is verity hidden, like hidden is treasure in a cave. The wise man there-- 
1. Paratatva. 
90. of. आलोज्य सर्वशास्त्राणि विचार्य च पुनः पुनः । 
इदमेकं सुनिष्पन्नं ध्येयो नारायणस्सदा ॥ सत्यं सत्यं पुनस्सत्यमुद्धृत्य भुजमुच्यते । वेदशास्त्रात्परं नास्ति न दैवं केशवात्परम् ॥ 
79 
fore would prefer the spiritual ways of the Great. 
The great sages Vyāsa, Valmiki, Manu Brihaspati, Suka, Saunaka, and others confirm our view. 
Let alone these several sages. Look 
at this one :- 
92. Parāsara,'-the real perceiver of truth 
1. Once during boyhood Parāsara, learning that his father had been consumed by a Rakshasa incited by Visvamitra, wanted to perform a sacrifice to exterminate all the Rakshasas. Vasishta intervened and requested Parāsara to desist from his desire to kill other Rakshasas 
who were quite innocent in the matter of the death of his father and then Parāsara stopped his sacrifice. Hearing this glad tidings, sage Pulastya came to the scene and feeling glad that his descendants were saved from a tragical death, blessed our Parasara with the boon that he alone would perceive the true God. Vasishta also blessed him that the boon of Pulastya prove true. Parāsara has himself cf. प्रदिशतु 
should prove mentioned this in Vishnupurana. 
भगवानशेषपुंसां इरिरपजन्मजरादिकां समृद्धिम् ॥ the 
colophon of the Vishnu purana. 
80 
that pertaineth to the Supreme God, who prayeth for Moksha's eternal bliss, to come to all mankind,-bliss exempt from all pangs of birth, dotage and death,-himself supporteth our view, and this is quite enough. Sumati.-Aryaputra? This statement of thine doth not admit of a further rejoinder. I beseech thee to present to Jíva, in a nut-shell, the quintessence of all the Vêdānta. He is in earnest to arrive at truth, but is now perplexed in Vedantic searchings demanding several substantial supports. 
King.-Well conceived. I shall meet thy desire. 
93. The Lord of Sri, whose Sankalpa is the main prop of the three kinds of conscients and non-conscients' and who is the only Prime Origin of the four Purushārthas', is the only resting place of all the cluster of the Srutis as the ocean is of all the 
rivers. 
1. The three kinds of conscients are बद्धाः, मुक्ताः, नित्याः । 
,,,, non-conscients are,, प्रकृति, कालं, शुद्धसत्वम् । 
2. Four ends of life-धर्म, अर्थ, काम, मोक्ष81 
Further :- 
94. Supreme is the spouse of Srî; most beneficial is Bhakti or Prapatti towards Him. His blessed Sankalpa sucketh up the Samsāra-sea. In no time can a person overcome the Nescience-fiend through the Noblest Mantra, the Ashtākshara', bequeathing the knowledge (therefor.) 
My love! That which cleareth the doubts of even dullards hath now been briefly stated. 
3 
95. But in this Kali-age, some perverts, under the tight cloak of VedaVāda only seem to combat the apostates like Saugata, by insincere language like that passed between brothers-in-law. Pity! 
But these have been refuted threadbare by the best expounders of Vedanta. 
1. The Holy Mantra of 8 syllables. 
2. Only ostensibly supporting the Vedic teachings but really following the teachings of Buddhiste. Vada - Argument. 
3. A division amongst Buddhists. 
9. 8. 6 
82 
For, savants adopt styles, terse and diffuse (as occasion demands). 
Sumati.-Well said, my lord! For, my mind is perturbed by the fear whether the Upanishads would all end in misinterpretation by endless arguments of diverse sages, like cows driven and dragged hither and thither by thieves. 
King. Enough of thy doubts! 
96. Sruti, followed by the several Smritis,. such as that of Manu, etc, unquestionably accepted as authorities by eminent men, countenanceth not, even in dream, the Smritis of Kapila, etc, involving selfcontradiction, but that Sruti, the authority per se, well fortified too by steady logic, deafeneth the uproar of sophistry 
(Behind the curtain.) 
97. Like Ugrasêna,' thrown into prison by the wicked Kamsa,' our Lord Jiva hath been 
1. Ugrasena the maternal grand-father of Lord Krishna was the ruler of Madhura (North). He was deposed and imprisoned by his own son 
83 
cast in prison' by Mahāmôha, who knoweth not that this will bring about his own complete ruin. As by Krishna assisted by Balarama, Jiva will be liberated by the very renowned, merciful and allbenevolent king Viveka and shall attain Moksha? 
King.--(Listening with joy.) 
Love mine! This is the heavenly oracle predicting the unfailing future, even like unto the Revelations of the Vêdas. 
Sumati.-(With joy). Aryaputra! Indeed this is the voice of the Immortals which can never turn false. 
Kamsa labouring under the dread of an oracle. (during the bridal procession of his own sister Devaki,) that her 8th son shall kill him (Kamsa). Lord Krishna (the Sth sou) in due time slew Kamsa in a duel, liberated Ugrasena and reinstated him as the king of the Yadavas. 
1. Samsara. 
Brother of Lord Krishna. In the original also means Mighty Krishna. 
84 
King.-Love mine! Verily indeed! By thy co-operation, 1 fancy that the attainment of success is now within reach. 
98. May the drop of desire to conquer the hosts of agnostics and apostates develop into the river of Madhusudana's grace, watering well the Kalpaka tree of Perseverance, so much esteemed by savants, and fulfil my wish. 
(Again behind the curtain, drums beating.) 
Sumati.-(With wonder)-Aryaputra! Far off seemeth the event to celebrate the liberation of Jiva with the beat of drums, as also the occasion for our herds of elephants to be seized with frenzy for 
war. 
Hallo! but how then is it that the sky reverberateth with loud uproar, like the roar of clouds at the time of the great Cataclysm ? 
King.-Love mine! This is the drum beaten by the Immortals who hasten our prepar. ation for victory. Now that we have 
85 
strengthened our own side, we must now strive to overthrow our enemy's side. 
(Thus saying both exeunt.) 
Finis Act I, termed Svapakshaprakāsa (Demonstration of one's own creed.) 
AUM. 
ÔM=(A-U-M) 
SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 
ACT II. 
THEN ENTER SRADDHA' AND VICHARANA." 
Vicharana.With thy brow bedewed with beads of sweat, thou seemest as flurried as the cow to see her calf. 
1. Lovely are thy globules of sweat, resembling nectar from thy face-moon dripping, or in the lustrous Malli-blossom" blown dewing, or from the noble creeper of youth budding. 
Sraddha. -My beloved companion! With a wish to prosecute (to a good end) what hath been undertaken by her husband (Viveka), who is firmly planted in the one-pointed 
1. Zeal. 2. Investigation. 3. Jasmine flower. 
87 
verdict of the Upanishads, and who hath taken the resolve to combat the opponents (thereof), Sumati the faithful, the blessed wife of Viveka, hath, to symbolize the welfare (of the mission) sped to the hill of gems fringing the woodland of pramada,1 bidding me cull a cluster of lotuses golden, worthy to lay at the lotus-feet of Sri's Spouse (Vishnu). She there sits, heart full of joy, and I shall speed to Gangā as smiling with her freshes as Sarasvati, the swan in the lotus-face of the Lotus-born2. 
(Gesturing fatigue of journey). 
2. When will the clear fair Mandakini," with banks on either side of its stream, fragrant with the odours of jasmine that creep up the Kalpaka-trees flourishing amidst cool ponds between, (when will this Mandakini,) alas! wear away the sorrows which, by (souls) violently whirled in samsāric wheel,' are hard to bear? 
1. A Pleasure Garden where ladies of the harem sport. The Demiurge, son of Vishnu. 3. The Ganges. i.e., rebirths without number. 
2. 
4. 
88 
Vicharana.-(Pointing in front). 
Here floweth in our vicinity the Ganga. Thou shalt rest for a while, to ward off the Sun's heat,-as piercing as the poignant words of a villain,-in the jasmine bower grown on an islet in Ganga that issueth flowing from the feet of Madhu's Conquerer (Vishnu) and rich with the odour of the honey of Kalpaka-blossoms, scattered by the gentle breeze as cool as the heart of the good, and then proceed. 
3. In the self-same place- 
The wind-tossed trees shower from their branch-tops flowers prodigally redolent,-flowers fit to deck the fillets circling the locks of the ladies of Mahêndra's court, reposing in the shade,-flowers reminding the shafts of the great archer Kāma, the betrayer of the coyness of women. Sraddha.-Be it as it pleaseth thee, my friend! 
(Both sit down with ease.) 
Sraddha.Lo! Vicharanā! What brought thee 
to this place ? 
89 
Vicharana. My beloved friend! Hear me. 
Some apostates and agnostics, clever in establishing the doctrine of Buddha and Jina, have now been ordered by king Mahāmôha-irate at hearing the preparations of king Vivêka, assisted by his chief Vyavasaya,'-to perturb Jiva whose mind is now firmly fixed on Purushottama's (Vishnu's) lotus-feet, by diverting it to some other object, just like a tiller leaving his plough and running after a jackal'. The rumour that these atheists surround the Jiva hath reached Sumati, our queen, who hath asked me to convey this news confidentially to the chief Vyavasaya, who is now closetted with the great king Vivêka. I have now set out to see this Vyavasaya. 
Sraddha. That the Perverts have joined hands with Mahāmôha in his enterprise is just like the asses' song in the ghost's marriage. But mind not. It is no difficult task at all 
1. Industry or Effort. 2. हालिकजम्बुकदर्शनन्याय 
90 
for our great king to overthrow the doctrines of our opponents. 
Vicharana.-Hallo! Sraddhā! How thinkest thou that the doctrines of several able apostates, pursuing the creed of Brihaspati1 and others, could be subverted by a single person? 
Sraddha. Thou shalt realise the truth of what I say, on the basis of the popular dictum that truth alone endureth and untruth betrayeth itself in time. 
4. Quick can Vivêka overthrow the creeds of all Heretics like the rising Sun driving darkness dense, like the raging wild fire devouring the forest dry,-the forest of the Vindhya range,-like the mighty hurricane blowing off cotton mountains high. 
1. The School of Philosophy founded by Brihaspati the main doctrine of which is :--" Enjoy whilst thou livest, for it is but blank after death." 
Eat and live to-day, let to-morrow take care of itself." &c. See Paramata-bhanga by Desika.91 
Therefore the attempt of Mahāmôha in collecting a host of Perverts to conquer Vivêka is no better than that 
of a stone-raft sought out for crossing the high seas. 
Vicharana.-Dear friend! Thy words have swift imparted courage to me, and my mis-givings have given way. I shall see my lady after speedily executing her commands. 
Sraddha.-Hallo! Vichārana! Thy level-headedness, and friendship as well, have been demonstrated. I will now gather lotus blossoms, and thou wilt betake to the royal castle. 
Interlude ends. 
(Both exeunt.) 
THEN ENTER KING AND VYAVASAYA. 
King.-General mine! This 
indeed is the 
best time for me to take stock of work done and of work remaining as regards Jiva journeying to the goal of Bliss,-Jiva 
92 
distracted by pursuits vain and bound by karmas severe, so many times over. 
(Brooding for a while and sighing.) 5. In this perfect world, teeming mostly with ignoramuses, God's displeasure compelleth crafty men being born, to range themselves in hostile camps, to devise doctrines diverse, and by their inculcation to provoke wranglings many. In no way do these differ from the ravings of men gone daft. 
Alas! How shall true Vêdānta thrive in this world pestered by (such) doctrines distractingly diverse, causing confusion worse confounded? 
(Looking at the sky.) 
Ah, thou vile Mahāmôha! By rendering the worlds three bewildered what hath been or what will be thy gain? 
6. Where drugs life-giving have become scarce, noxious ones beteem the sea-girt earth. 
To remove this pain, I shall resort to the Lord Almighty. 
93 
(Gesturing recollection.) 
7. I adore the causeless and stainless splendour of Hayagriva, present as a pure mount crystal-made, depriving the agonies of the worlds three by His dazzle, nectarlike,-Hayagriva whose neighing voice resembleth the Upanishads Eternal. 
8. Further, may the neigh of Hayagrivathe sum and sense and seat of Vedas, Sāma, Rig and Yajur,-of all obstacles the Remover, the surging swell of the sea of selfknowledge-efface my inner ignorance, caused by the clamour of heretics, conceited, combative and carrying a roaring trade (of theirs.) 
Senapati.-Ah. Great King! By valour over Mahāmôha, thy success is as sure as the unfailing noise of the Aranyakas that compare only with Anaranya's curse. 
1. The horse-faced form of Vishnu. 
2. The main body of the Upanishads. 
3. A king of the Ikshvāku race, an ancestor of Sri Rama, was forced to wage a battle with Bavana when the former was quite unprepared and 
94 
9. Thou hast just imparted Vedantaknowledge to Jiva; all that remaineth now to be done is to remove his inattention2. 
King.-(With joy.) Genial soul. In all modesty hast thou rightly reminded me. With thee to aid, what yet remaineth to be done, I guess, hath already been done. 
10. Let alone Sama, Dama and others, arrayed in hosts of hundreds and thousands, heroic enough to cripple Mahāmôha's gratuitous hate for me. Like unto Vishvaksêna3, the all-devoted to Vishnu in the work of overthrowing Asuras, art thou (to me) the efficient tool to fell faiths, faithless. 
was eventually slain, and who before his deatb pronounced the following curse on Rāvana. 
cf. Uttara Ramayana. 
उत्पत्स्यते कुले त्यस्मिन्निक्ष्वाकूणां महात्मनाम् । 
रामो दाशरथिर्नाम यस्ते प्राणान्हरिष्यति ॥ 
1. The reference is that in the 1st Act the Vedanta 
knowledge has been imparted to Jiva. 
2. In this act the subversion of other heterodox 
faiths is to be undertaken. 
3. The Lord of Hosts under Vishnu, 
95 
Senapati.-My Lord! I am like thy weapons but a dependent of thine, for thy foes to be worsted. 
11. Thy majesty, firm in combating thy opponents,-for thou art faultless of knowledge in diverse Sāstras thriving unfettered Logic etc., needest little help, an unrivalled warrior as thou art of high prowess. Such being the case, like but thy shadow,thee, I follow, filled as thou art with the flood of " food reflective'" in all thy acts which go to make, and keep and unmake (matters). Therefore either Sumati or myself cannot, like the fish separated from water, live even for a moment apart from thee. 
King. (Musing). 
1. 
12. General! Mark thee! Several creeds sophistic are current in this world as against reasoned argument, designed for stultifying 
i. e. Jñana knowledge, Darsana - Vision, Prapti = 
Fruition. 
2 cf. न च सांता त्वया हीना न चाहमपि राघव । 
मुहूर्तमपि जीवावो जलान्मत्स्याविवोधनौ ॥ (Ramayana.) 
96 
the wits of the Asuras etc. They are like darkness to be swept by the Sun. 
These silly disputants, who indulge in diverse meaningless arguments-which differ not from the uproar of the great ocean churned by Madûsûdana's strong arms with the Mandara mount revolvingattempt to metamorphose even a Brihaspati1 into a Vanaspati.2 These Pervert-Elephants, eagerly raiding the plantain-grove -Path of Virtue, are surely fit to be overthrown by the most mighty Lion of Forceful Authority, which always hath a cautious beginning,-Lion which hath for its shining fangs, the founding of the Right Creed and the overthrow of the Wrong Creeds,-Lion, which hath for its claws sharp, the five kinds of Tarakas and which dwelleth in the forest of the Upanishads. 
1. The Preceptor of the Devas, 
deity, 
3. The five are--(1) 3 
2. The forest (2) - 
(5) अनिष्ट- 
न्योन्याश्रय (3) चक्रकाश्रय (4) अनवस्था 
प्रसङ्गरूप 
97 
Senapati.-My Lord! Indeed thou hast appointed Vada' and Vêdānta Siddhānta2 to overthrow the heretical creeds. The coup de main of that dialectic warfare is come nigh. 
(Then enter Siddhanta and Vāda1 guised as Guru-preceptor-and disciple.) Guru.-Live thou long! Adept of the highest truth and opposed to opponents as Hanumān to the Lanka-hosts, I judge that thou hast by agitation and clarification established Spiritual Science according to the maxim "planting the post."5 
1. Argument 2. The Vedantic apodictic. 
Siddhanta is here Sri Rāmānuja. 
.3. 
4. 
Vāda is here Sri Vêdānta Desika; Chronologically Sri Vedanta Desika was not a contemporary of Sri founded by the 
Ramanuja but the faith 
latter was firmly esta- 
blished and amply improved by the former. Naturally enough the yearning to meet his preceptor was so dominant in the mind of our Sri Vedanta Desika that the much-longed for meeting is arranged for dramaturgically in the discourse and criticism of other faiths that is found in the rest of this Act. 
5. Sthana-nikhananyaya 
s. s. 7 
maxim: an analogy 
98 
Pupil.-13. (With humility) Divine sire! In the ascetic garb thou seemnest a Dattatreya' described by the great sages as having defended the Vedas,--Dattatreya who was Vishnu Himself incarnate bearing the Tridanda2, when inroads were made into them by Kānādas, Buddhas and Pāshandās5. Guru.-Long life to thee! These outcastes and perverts are in truth Asuras. I vanquish them, assuming the form of Vishnu. 
Pupil.-Divine sire! Worship-worthy art thou, in thy form of Vishnu, with the reverence meet for Vishnu. 
1. 
14. Now I adore thee, the wearer of the 
for establishing a truth on a firm basis. viz., a pillar inserted in loose soil and firmly planted therein by continued to and fro movement. 
An incarnation of Vishnu as son of Atri. 
2. The triple bamboo staff carried by the Vaishnava Sanyasins representing the subjugation of thought word and deed. 
3. Followers of the Vaiseshika doctrine which 
recognised 7 instead of 16 categories. 
4. The followers of Buddhism. 
5. See n. 5, p. 17. 
99 
holy thread and urdhra-pundra,1 the bearer of the holy staff-Tridanda, the sum-total of the virtues of the worlds three, the protector of all refugees and the wearer of the ornamented sikhā3. 
(Thus saying prostrates.) 
Guru.-15. May thou live long! 
May thou 
establish the Vêdānta, and the heresies overthrow. May thou be esteemed by the pious and of vast bliss be thou receptacle. 
(Thus saying, hands a ring of Kusa grass symbolic of Divine Power.) 
Pupil. (Receives and rears it on the right hand 
after placing the same on the head). 
16. May the varied rivers of the great bliss of Brahmānubhava, diversified with the emulating billows of ardour, numberless and ceaseless, descend on thee,-(rivers) easy of reach to Sages and Siddhas", 
1. The Vaishnava vertical marks borne on the forehead. 2. See n. 2.-p. 98. 
3. Tuft of hair grown on the head of an Arya, the 
mark of a Vaidika. 
4. The enjoyment of God. 
5. Yogis. 
100 
(rivers) mingling with the milk and honey of Brahman's perfections par excellence. 
Pupil.-(With humility) Methinks that all my hopes are practically realised through thy divine blessings which never prove futile. Divine sire! If I am fit to hear what I propose to ask thee, I pray it might be put into my ears. 
Guru.-When a pupil, good and lowly, doth approach, what is there that cannot in its good time be imparted to him? 
Pupil.-Divine sire! Victory by logomachic methods is by great sages forbidden. For, they say that he who gloateth over such a victory over a Brahmana shall be born a cursed' tree in the burning ground. How else are our disputants of the opposite side to be vanquished? 
Guru.-(With favour) Youth! In right good spirit hast thou put me this question, but 
1. वादेन ब्राह्मणं जित्वा दृष्टो भवति यो द्विजः । 
मद्याने जायते वृक्षः कङ्कगृध्रादिसेवितः ॥101 
bounds of duties bidden are surely determined by differences of caste, order, birth, 
race, clan, community, place, time etc. Therefore I desire to defeat these heretics through thee, as myself by my order is debarred from doing so, even as Visvamitra did slay' the Rākshsas through Rāma only. In this affair then,- 
17. Able lad! Let Jalpa along with Vitanda be far from thee. Win thy opponents, inspired by well-established truth. 
Or acting under my behests even like Sri Raghava plying Balā and Atibalā under 
1. The allusion is to 
is to the Rakshasas, Subāhu Māricha and the Raksbasi Tātaka who all caused havoc to Visvamitra's sacrifice. Sage Visvamitra to avert this evil begged Dasaratha of Rama's help, who was just then in his teens. Rama accompanied Visvamitra, killed Subahu and Tātakā and made Māricha flee for life. 
2. जल्पः = विजिगीषु कथा (Prattling with intent for victory.) 3. वितण्डा - स्वपक्षस्थापनहीना परपक्ष प्रतिक्षेपमात्र पर्यवसाना । 
(criticism.) 
4. Two mantras taught by Visvamitra to Rama for 
vanquishing enemies. 
・ 
102 
the tutelage of Visvamitra, thou shalt conquer the apostates who abuse the Vêdas and the Almighty, even Jalpa' and Vitanda2 pressed into service under my guidance, but as tests of Tatva3, save when thou dost argue with virtuous souls. 
Pupil.-(With suppliant hands) Thy divine 
commands I bear on my head, but how is it that this onerous work of capable debators is laid by thee-the world-teacher on my insignificant self? 
Guru.-Listen. 
18. Several are my disciples in this world who grasp more than what is taught, and who are adepts in the tenets of diverse doctrines such as those of Buddhism etc, mutually conflicting, but none but thou whom I approve and whose clear wit streameth full and startling, art sought after by the opponents to take up the gauntlet. Pupil.-Revered sire! I note thy commands. No debate can proceed without some doc- 
1. See n. 2, page 101. 2. See n. 3, page 101. 3. Truth. 
103 
trine agreed upon. Hence assign to me as thou willest. 
Guru.-Charming child! When there is a difference of opinion among our own adherents, thou shalt stand by a Sāstra common to them, but when the difference is with rival thinkers, by the Vêdānta Siddhānta; even here, there are five or six high-class works dignified by brevity and glossary composed by us under the inspiration of Achāryas-Parāsara, Vyāsa, Suka, Saunaka, Bodhāyana and others. Wellversed in these works, and heart set on them, thou shalt employ authorities and arguments that will carry convincing joy to the assembly. 
Pupil. --So long as thou art vouchsafing to me, 
I shall not in the least err. 
19. In a mind elevated in character by the grace of the Guru, what (truth) instinctively flasheth can vanish never. But when wrong interpretations are fabricated even by Rishis or others, they shall in no time pass into limbo. 
104 
Guru.-Lad! Dreading the world-deluding sophistries (extant), I commend thee to close attention. 
20. The fallacies established by ill-witted apostates and perverts, causing a momentary confusion even to (the intellect of) a council of adepts in (Vêdāntic) debate,-only connoting nonsense, genetic of false developments-and as stony as the heart of women, excite much fear. 
Pupil.-Divine sire! This dread concerning me can only arise from thy inordinate affection for me. 
21. Breatheth there a man, desirous of wordy-war who dare challenge me to contest, whilst at thy hands I have received all knowledge, and whilst under thy commands, I am acting? 
Guru.-Pupil ! Beware of this as well. 
Pupil.-May it please thy reverence to favour 
me with thy further will. 
22. Our utterances, lighted up by the 
105 
grace of the Achāryas, delightfulmade for instruction, convenient, the crowning jewel of Dame Sruti espoused of the Lord,utterances terse' or elaborate2, appealing to soft minds, approvable to high minds'compiled with due attention to importance,5 ----utterances which elucidate the Lord's Song, are fit to be believed in by the wise. 
Pupil.--That thou shouldst so say is a superfluity, for thy works are forsooth the props of the Upanishads. 
1. 
23. For, ye have lit the lamp of Sri Bhashya, feeding it daily with the oil of your love,-the joy of the savants, in their hours of happiness,-lit up for the delectation of the postulants in the foul night of Samsara. 
24. Though small the acquaintance, the Sastra thou hast ordained sufficeth to uproot atheism and appraise the Lord's 
Vêdānta-Dipa. 
3. Gadya-Traya. 
5. 
2. Sri-Bhashya. 
4. 
Vedanta-sāra. 
Vedartha-sangraha 6. Gita Bhashya 
All by Ramanuja. 
106 
Grace, to drive darkness and enhance the joy' of God-knowledge,2 to redeem from evil ways and to implant in The Way. 
However owing to my vascilating disposition, I submit to thee a matter once remembered, but now escaping my 
memory. 
Guru.-What may that be? 
Pupil.-25. Ordering that-wise and ordaining this-wise, how is one (God) rendered a well-wisher ? 
Guru.-Humph! How clever in proposing 
subtle questions ! 
Pupil.-How is redemption possible from sin, 
which is hard to surmount, on account of its attendant circumstances? 
Guru.--Thou hast now propounded another 
question more subtle still! 
Pupil.--How is punishment inflictable on one 
freely permitted to err? 
Guru.-Considering Karma as the conditioning 
1. Knowledge of God. 2. Verity (Tatva-juana). 
107 
cause and as destined to end, all these three-fold difficulties disappear.' 
Pupil.-(With joy) How tersely recondite and dignified, and patent only to cultured minds, are thy good self's words? I shall propound this same before the august assembly. 
26. The High Pontiff's utterances rain the nectar of Moksha-(the nectareous flood) abrading the banks of the modern illwitted, quenching, medicine-like, the poisonous fire of false faiths burning up 
2 
1. The implication is:-Re question (1) God's wellwishes to jivas are in no way affected as jivas indulge in sins owing to the result of their past Karmas. Re question (2), the cause of even a learned man committing sin is due to his Karma. Re question (3), though it may be that the sins are the making of God, jivas nevertheless indulge in sins owing to the force of their previous Karmas and as the result thereof get punished. 
2. Reference to the out-Vedic creeds such as 
Buddhism and Jainism. 
3. Reference to masked Vedantism such 
Advaitism. 
108 
the soul,-the toilet-maids (ie., the utterances) who plait the top-knot' of Eternal Sarasvati's tresses. 
27. Other creeds, knit together by hundreds of jargon-words, conveying nonsense and eventuating in nothing but confusion, cannot be palatable to those that have tasted the High Yogi's works. Can Siva accustomed to wear on his head the sacred Gangā, teeming with pearls and oysters, bear a slimy ditch infested with frogs? 
Divine sire! Some near in this assembly whisper that thy creed hath but few adherents in this world where SO many creeds obtain. I shall just deliver them a repartee (looking around) 
1. Reference to the closing or crowning parts of the 
Vedas i.e., the Upanishads. 
2. 
The Goddess of speech personifying the Veda itself. 
यति- 
3. Sri Ramanuja is referred to in this verse and the rest of the Act variously as यतिपुरंदर, यतीन्द्र, राज, यतीश्वर, etc., 
109 
Ha! Pets of Devas !! 
28. Hearts set on voluminous works composed by the wrong-witted, take the words of the Lord of Yatis2 (Rāmānuja) as light. But the Kaustubha3 gem decorating the broad bosom of Murāri (Vishnu) certainly in the scales weigheth light as against a mountain ! 
29. Let the works of the Lord of Yatis which fix the sense of ancient Vedas, be lauded or cajoled, by those whose minds are warped by false faiths! What doth a salt-dealer know of the value of camphor, the essence and fragrance of which are so loudly lauded as to shiver the city (into pieces)? 
(Listening) What! Sayest thou that our faith is but new? (clapping hands and laughing) 
1. Goats-as brainless as goats. 
2. 
Ascetics. 
3. The ornament worn on the chest of Vishnu. 
The implication is that though Kaustubha is lighter than Kalachala mountain, its superiority is unquestionable. 
110 
30. A thing is conceived by one as beyond dispute; another by another similarly, both claiming adherents. No sane man can here say both are right. Hence when one party demolisheth the other, no finding and judgment are possible. Ergo, that (doctrine)-Old or New-is to be accepted. which accordeth with Truth.' 
Further:- 
31. At its time all is new, after which, it is old. Hence old and new do not constitute the ground for good and bad. 
Guru.-Enough with these stupid. 
Let those 
be attacked now who dispute the sense. 
Pupil.-Holy sire! Who, even in a dream, can fabricate flaws of sense in thy creed, exempt from all trace of fault? 
32. That vain person who imputeth fallacies of his own creed to thy creed harmonising with the Crest of the course 
1. That which is arrived at by viewing it from the 
right perspective. 
2. Upanishads.111 
of Srutis, can be no better than a person who, flinging dirt with his own hands, but which falleth on his own person, wisheth to stain the sky therewith! Further. 
By none can thy school be assailed. Vain ranters thus are these stupid opponents ! 
33. Let one close one's eyes, the Sun is not screened thereby; let one close one's ears firmly, the cuckoo into a crow is not transformed; let a lad whirl fast round, with him the Earth rotateth not; let him fight with his fist, the sky is not disturbed thereby. 
Guru.-Lovely lad! Right well hast thou spoken. I am just on the look-out for a suitable president and an assembly for thee, who hath launched the capaign against all pugilistic heretics. 
(Gestures meditation.) 
King.-Generalissimo! Opportune 'tis now, 
for us also to join. 
112 
Senapati.I fully agree with thy Majesty's 
resolve. 
(Both approach.) 
Pupil. Divine sire! Close at hand is the President attended by his Generalissimo. 
Guru. (Turning round and looking with joy and 
regard.) 
34. Anon, and in right time hath (the Sun of) Vivêka risen, attended by his sunshine. Vyavasaya; he will himself dispel the night of scepticism, weaned of all wisdom. 
35. Yonder shineth the paragon of virtue, Vyavasaya, Viveka's generalissimo standing there will all savants that espouse 
his school. 
King. With humility) Here Vivêka with his generalissimo payeth his respects due to thy divinity. 
Garu.-Great king! May thou be blest in 
every respect. 
113 
Further:- 
5 
3 
36. The Sruti, though violated in various ways by Bauddhas Kānādas, Naiyāyikas," Jinas, Kapilas, Chārvākas, and Gômukhavyaghras shining in the (ostensible) coat of Vedic research, is, in this world, protected by thy (Vivêkā's)" Saviour-the Almighty who incarnateth Himself in diverse ways, and doth thrive, coming out unscathed from the turmoil of perverts. 
1. See n. 4, p. 98. 
2. 
3. 
One of the 6 principal systems of Hindu Philosophy founded by Kānāda. 
A system of Hindu Philosophy founded by the sage Gautama. 
4. Jaina. 
5. 
6. 
The founder of the Sankhya system of Philosophy. A sophistical system of Philosophy founded by Brihaspati who propounded the grossest form of materialism. 
7. Prachhanna Bauddhas i.e., Believers in Vedas, only to appearance but really professing Buddhistic doctrines, as deceptive to appearance as one possessing the tame cow's face with the ferocity of a tiger hidden under it. 
8. चिदचिदीश्वरतत्वविवेकः । 
S. 8. 8 
114 
King.-Holy sire! Thy mere look is fraught with all kinds of blessings for us; thy well-wishing (again) seemeth a superfluity. 
Guru.-King! When I have been in dire need of a President, thou hast, by the swing of merit, appeared on the spot, attended by thy general. President majesty! 
Then bid this disciple of mine to perform the task on hand. 
King.-I shall direct him as thou willest. 
(Turning to the pupil.) 
Sweet Brahman! Deeply devoted art thou to this all-knowing sage. 
37. Methinks, this our Guru is no other than the Vedanta creed itself (incarnate) and thyself the debate, lord of disputants (incarnate.) 
To this, imprimis, thy attention is to be bestowed. 
Pupil.-Great King! Command. 
King.-Peace to thee! 
115 
38. With humility, please good men; the ways of the wise, demonstrate; offenders of holy men, dread; the Trivarga-addict,' treat as straw; resting thy load in thy Lord Eternal,-Allforgiving Sri's Spouse,-adopt the habit of the Chātaka2 bird, ever on cloud intent. 
Senapati.-Holy youth! Understandest thou 
His Majesty's will? 
Pupil.-Is there more to attend to? 
King.-39. Learn the letters of the Upanishads, and avoid association of the aliens; serve as a rule sage-souls, and despise the averse" and the perverse. 
1. The three aims or ambitions of men, of lower 
sort viz., Dharma, Artha and Kama. 
The cloud must rain before the Chataka bird will drink. The God-aspirant likewise looks up to God alone for His drops of grace. 
3. Avert from God and therefore averse to the 
Vedanting. 
116 
Guru.-Live thou long! listen attentively. 
Pupil.-Great is thy grace! 
King.-Pious youth ! 
40. By knocking down the misconstructions, strayed from authoritative paths, adversaries shall be expelled on the principle called Sthālipulāka'. Surely all the gold ingot is not rubbed on the touchstone to test its quality. 
Pupil.-Aye! As willeth thy Majesty, will I 
summon these quidnunes for gymnastics. 
41. 
(A little louder). 
verbal 
Here haileth Yatindra-the hill-fount of the rivers of all knowledge,-Yatindra, the tree assuaging the fatigue and refreshing those tired of ceaseless circling in Samsāra,the rising sun to the night of illusion of the 
1. Ascertaining by testing only a few grains in the pot, that the whole rice in the pot is boiled; hence using a test. 
117 
perverts, and the full-orbed Moon to the tides of the Vedic sea. 
1 
(Inside the curtain.) 
42. Schooled well in the systems of Tarka, Vyakarana2 and Mîmāmsā3, and our manliness paraded in systems counter also, we declare boldly in this assembly that we care not our contesting foes-from Sêtu up to Himalaya-a yarn, straw or chaff. 
Senapati.-Arya! Hearest thou the proud 
challenge of the opponents ? 
Pupil.-(With anger) Enough of insolence! 
43. On my head humbly bear I, the lotus-feet of the wise whose hearts are redolent with the lore of Yatirāja, but On the head of those whose hearts are 
1. Logic. 
2. 
Grammer. 
3. One of the six chief systems of Hindu Philosophy. 
4. Sānkhyas, Vaisêsbikas, etc. 
1. 
118 
burning with faiths adverse, I plant my left foot'. 
Sri Desika does not mean literally what he states here. It is a mannerism he adapts such as Sahadeva's similar assertion when in the great Rajasûya sacrifice his discretion to do the first honor to Lord Krishna in preference to all great kings, sages and elders assembled was questioned by Sisupāla. Read Mahābbārata Sabhāparva 
thus :- 
८८ 
Asked by Sisupāla thus:- 
प्रष्टा वियोनिजो राजा प्रतिवक्ता नदीसुतः । प्रतिग्रहीता गोपालः प्रदाता च वियोनिजः ॥ " 
Sahadeva replied thus :- 
“स पार्थिवानां सर्वेषां गुरुः कृष्णोऽपरो न हि । तस्मादभ्यर्चितोऽस्माभिः सर्वे समन्तुमर्हथ | 
यो वा न सहते कश्चिद्राज्ञां सबलवाहनः । क्षिप्रं युद्धाय निर्यातु तस्य मूर्व्याहितं पदम् ॥ 
ततो न व्याजहारैषां कश्चिद्बुद्धिमतां सताम् । मानिनां बलिनां राज्ञां मध्ये संदर्शिते पदे ॥ 
Similar instances lead one to think that one of the ancient ways to assert incontrovertible truths is by some such open taunt. All that is meant here therefore is that Sri Desika is 
119 
King.-Blessed sire! Timely is this Arya's bravado, like Hanuman's' breathing implicit devotion to the master. 
Guru.-(Aside) What can be the motive of the king in giving prominence to this boast ? 
44. (Aloud.)-A hero in the system of Sruti and adept in ousting the adverse (thereto), may it be that the boast of such a Debater is not gloried? Pupil.-(Humbled and trembling)-(Aside) 
Alack! To efface2 the sin of selfpraise, unconscious, let me laud my masters and their teachings. 
45. (Aloud) Here standeth triumphant our Apostolic lineage,-consoling,-proud of 
firmly convinced of the truth of Ramānuja Darsana and that he is equally convinced of the hollowness of the other Darsanas. 
1. cf. न रावणसहस्रं मे युद्धे प्रतिबलं भवेत 
2 
It is a belief among the pious that the mention of the Acharya's name alone will wipe off the most heinous sins. 
120 
the pride of rivals quelled by the vibrating waves of Hayagriva's' neigh, revelling in (our) heart-thrones,-lineage revealing the right way by the yarn-pile of other creeds being swept away by winds,2 borne of the fluttering pennons hoisted on the mansions of the quarters ten. 
46. Had Srí Rāmānuja not promulgated the ancient system of Philosophy, which saveth Dame Sruti from widowhood," by still vouchsafing for her the embrace of her Lord,5-ridiculous would be Vyasa", oblivious would be Vālmiki', a toy would be Sri Suka", and vain indeed 
1. The horse-faced Avatara of Vishnu. 
←i ci 
The allusion is to Nyaya-Tatva, (of Nathamuni) ---Siddhi-traya (of Yamuna), Sri-Bhashya (of Rāmānuja.) 
3. Satadûshani, (of Desika) etc. 
4. By refuting materialists who impute wrong meanings to the Sruti by denying the Godhead &c. 
5. The Parabrahman. 
6. 
7. 
The reputed author of the Mahabharata. 
39 
"1 
,, Rāmāyana. 
8. 
93 
39 
39 
,, Sri Bhagavata. 
the word Suka means a parrot as well.121 
the labours of the great Bôdhāyana'. 
King.-(With delight.) Who can not be won by this Arya, of such lasting love to his master? 
For:- 
47. Of love unabating for his master, ever intent on his praise, and with care for his goods, house, etc., and conserving Tradition for use for the fit, this grateful, sinless (disciple), is sure to earn his 
treasure. 
Pupil. I hope to come out victorious only by the strength of our siddhānta. Thy majesty shall anon witness it. 
48. The compositions of Yatirāja are immune from contradictions; lovely by reason of being distilled from Bodha yana's work, and blazing with faultless arguments; 
1. The reputed author of Vritti-grantha on Brahma- 
sûtras. 
2. Sri Bhashya and other works. 
3. 
Vritti-grantha. 
122 
by such incontrovertible annotations, they (compositions) serve to tap that nerve1 (in man) that is suffused with full-blossomed knowledge. 
Moreover:- 
49. This, our Dispensation thinneth all darkness, by reason of its compatibility with Perception2, its simplicity of Inferences, and its imperilment of atheism* by (God's) knowability from Scriptures indefective. This (Dispensation) 
is 
1. Knowledge is here the light or the illumination or the spiritual virtue the soul possesses intrinsically, and which is effectually hidden in 
64 
earthen vessels." The physiological counterpart of this psychical fact is the nerve or nervous centre alluded to, or it may be taken as a symbol. 
2. The reference is to Saugatas who deny the 
reality of the world. 
3. The reference is to Vaisêshikas who harp on 
arguing about the atomicity of atoms. 
4. The reference is to Mimamsakas who deny the 
Godhead. 
123 
demonstrative of Nathamuni's' intuitions, promoted by many works as those by Yāmuna', and fostered so well by Yatindra1. 
King. What say ye now? 
(Behind the curtain.) 
Great uproar by repeating "Tarka, etc. 
verse 42." 
(All listen.) 
Pupil.-(Repeating verse 43 in his turn, stops 
half way and looks at the King.) 
King.-Repeat, repeat. 
Pupil.-(Repeats the rest.) 
King.--Arga! I desire to have all doubts dissolved by thee, the treasure of all knowledge, gained from thy master, by disputations held, with the learned men here congregated. 
Pupil.-Proud and slighting). Thy Majesty ! 
Listen intently. 
1. Founders of the Sri Vaishnava Siddhanta 
50. 
124 
Kānāda's story, I have only too well studied, and those of Akshapāda have taught. With Purva Mimāmsa I am puffed. As to Sankhya and Yoga, I have oft discoursed upon them. Ha! Ha! Is there thus (yet) an iota for me to reflect about those, wandering in the wilderness of several false 
systems shattered indeed by Yatindra,-those blinded by the night of inner illusion ? 
Besides :- 
51. Whoso, in this last age (Kali), learneth this Yati-king's dialectic dissertations, disclosing the 
the peculiar 
peculiar Visishtadvaita doctrine',-the day-break to the darkness of nescience before him, anon declineth wrangling waves of Casuists, 
the 
1. artartRe: That the souls constitute the Infinite body of God. This doctrine is peculiar to Visishtadvaitism or qualified Monism and reconciles in the most satisfactory manner, so far ever attempted, of the true relation of Soul 
to God. 
125 
competing with each other to standardise their respective dogmas. 
Guru.-Great king! These pedantic perverts, who blow their own trumpets by their blatant tongues, are eager to throw the gauntlet. 
52. On the analogy of a 'Dog-Hog fight" these ravishers of Vêdānta-Siddhanta, lead the attack, in company. Let therefore thy General check them, so that they may each in turn argue with our pupil. 
Pupil.-53. (Smiling) A pre-conceived notion that Perception and Revelation are weaker than Inference, taketh hold of these contestants. But of no avail is Reasoning (i.e., inference) in arriving at Truth; therefore mere Reasoning is of little practical utility 
1. A pack of dogs, though quarrelling with each 
other, yet band together, forgetting for the time being their own mutual malice and chase a hog. Even so are the followers of creeds other than Vedanta-Siddhanta, who, though mutually differring from each other, club together when opposing the creed of Vedanta-Siddhanta. 
126 
in this world. Mind not the sundries; some wicked men, with conceit brimming in their minds, desire to overthrow, alas! the virtuous with arguments unworthy to be pronounced in an assembly. The foremost1 in this assembly and the foremost in the army, shall hear this 
as well :- 
54. Self-condemned standeth the mass of arguments adduced by these Casuists by their mental conflict with each other; their Sastras are refuted by the eternal Vedas. Now the contestants relying on mere bombastry, are no match for me, even if they bodily oppose me. 
(Smiling.) Hallo! The blind lead the blind with the staff, and the lame carry the Jame!! Even so are these perverts, whose wits are blinded by the darkness-Karma, and who are the trusted counsellors of Mahāmôha. 
1. Vivéka, the President (King.) 
2. Vyavasaya, the General. 
55. With 
127 
their oratorical effusions matching rills but swelling sudden under pour of rain,-bristling with vulgar slang, -and resembling shingles rattling in the mouth,'-these (casuists) entice only numskulls who enthuse (over such effusions). 
Ha! ha! These satellites of Mahāmoha flattering these orations, bring to our mind the jackals, belauding asses' music. 
King.-General! Direct, for debate one after another, these individuals, small-witted in that they flout at the Vedānta, pregnant with sense. 
Senapati.-I shall call to order these senselessly 
blatant men. 
or 
1. ie., slurring and indistinct pronunciation; 
their arguments are as much not amenable to reason as the improbable tale that a person swallowed a rock, or as deceptive as a juggler feigning to eat stones-or it also may mean offering stones to the listener to eat, instead of food r fruit. 
128 
(Turning round and looking.) 
Listen Oh non-Vedins and Vedamisinterpreters ! 
56. Stop now with your false jargon, dear only to the mean,-puffed up with mutual admiration but repugnant to the galaxy of savants. In troth see your methods lame before these truth-speaking lions of good men! 
Pupil.-Blessed sire! Cast thy looks this way. 
57. These men embrace corrupt dialects such as the Mahārāshtrā, Māgadhi, Saurasêni, Lāti, Gaudi, etc., which Buddha, Jina, and others, have passed off as Scriptures,dialects that are the laughing-stock (of the Samskritists.) 
I also, nevertheless, versed in all these dialects, shall win these disputants by their own weapons; so goeth the saying, that 
devils must be met by devils' patois." 
Guru.-Help thyself to language divine (ie., Samskrita) or non-divine i.e., Prākritic but 
129 
the divine would appear to be all-agreeable, for it seemeth to be so to the king, in all likelihood. 
King. - Sire divine! Mightily bold is this minent personage, the object of thy grace. 
Senapati.-What wonder ! 
1 
58. Here stand (arrayed in glory) these Agastyas, who have drained dry the ocean-streams of these boasting casuists, captured by the demons of vain debate,Agastyas, ripe with the voice of wisdom, by sitting at the feet of the king of ascetics(=Rāmānuja). 
59. The great tumult uprising from the mutually-contending and dry-discoursing elephant-army of these wranglers bursting with boast, and violating with vain talk the ways of the Veda, ceaseth, the 
1. The implication is that savants versed in Ramanuja's lore will put an end to the notoriety of the followers of rival creeds even as quickly as Agastya dried up the ocean by one sip of his s. s. 9 
130 
moment Yatindra's blessed word is uttered, albeit casually. 
Pupil.-Acting as I do in the presence of the 
president (king) and the commander-inchief, and armoured as I am firmly by the grace-filled eyes of my teacher, what fear is there in this wordy-war? 
60. 
Now:- 
Brilliant from my birth reigneth my intellect, and purposive. So it is by virtue of my Pontiff (-Rāmānuja),-the axe to the dreadful world-evil. Even the God-ordained great illusion-night can never bring sleep on me. drunk as I am in the nectar-drug, drawn from his (Pontiff's) milk-sea like sermons'. 
Besides :- 
Unrivalled, have we all these days passed among the disputants, filling the royal courts of the countries, Tundira, Chola, Pandya, Kerala, Karnata, Nepāla, 
1. Sri Bhashya &c.131 
Malava, Gauda, Lāta, etc., and never were there brow-beaten. Walking as we do, in the kingly ways of the Vedas, and keeping as we do the company of good men, we are happy. 
But why so contentious? 
For:- 
61. Let alone the fact that Sri Rāmānuja's followers have a spotless wisdom from their very birth. Let alone again the fact of his eternal works being by nature supreme, sportive and savoury. Who shall even dare to lift his eyes before my debate, conducted with a weapon-toweapon vehemence, in the war of words? 
Senapati.Indeed! 
62. What is achieved through the Acharya's single eye of grace or his two physical eyes cannot be achieved by the Three-eyed,' the Eight-eyed, or even the Thousand-eyed.3 
63. No other deem we our Deity, equal 
2. Prajapati. 
1. Rudra. 
3. Indra. 
132 
or high, than our Acharya whose tonguetip is bright, throne-made as it is by the Horse-faced', not even the Deity Narayana Himself, who,-His pristine glory unaffected-putteth on the Acharya's garb2, to uplift souls, sunk in the sea of Samsara. 
Guru.-Great king! By polite speech alone, hath thy General managed these leading debaters of other creeds. Let them now range themselves (before us) one after another. 
(Looking at the pupil.). 
Listen, lad! the first to be is the exposition of the creed of the Sankhyas, approximating to the Vedanta 
64. These adepts of the Sānkhya creed, viz. Kapila, Asuri, Panchasikha, etc. discriminating Matter and Soul, treat not of God. Sin-smitten (sure) are their minds. 
1. See n. 1, p. 120. 
2. ef. साक्षान्नारायणो देवः कृत्वा मर्त्यमयीं तनुम् । 
मग्नानुद्धरते लोकान्कारुण्याचास्त्रपाणिना । 
133 
Pupil.-(Aside.) In the contest about to open, I must first enlist the sympathy of this audience. 
65. (Aloud.) Deign to me, I beseech, oh! ye, who are bees in the lotus-feet of Murabhit', tapping therein the honey of Peace! (deign to me) that I may heartily regale your ears with the honey (of words.) 
(Turning to the Preceptor, bowing, and hands clasped):-— 
Sire divine! By thy command, let me refute these Sānkhyas. 
66. Materially influenced, if ye (Sānkhyas) only admit Matter and Soul, how hath God-the Crest-jewel of Srutis by the hundred-offended? If by severe sophistry, the Lord (God) hath been ejected, let other swindlers swindle ye of your faith! 
1. Vishnu. 
2. 
प्रधानक्षेत्रपति 
3. Chårvåkas and Nihilists who are still more 
Senapati. My lord! 
134 
67. These Sankhyas, of their obstinacy bereft, by this Arya's arguments, now categorise' this Lord of the Cosmos (God) as the twenty-fifth, as the twentysixth, as the twenty-seventh. 
King. Holy sire! If these Sankhyas have been won over to the With-God doctrine, grant them pardon and range them with the Vedāntins. 
Guru.-Stop, great king! For, these Sankhyas, though God-recognising, do yet generally grant a God of limited power, as understood by the Yoga philosophy. Hence direct this Vedantin to confute them (on this score.) 
1. 
argumentative, deny the existence of Matter 
and Soul. 
For details of categories, vide n. 1, p. 2. 
Some count God as the 25th Category. Others count Soul as the 25th Category and God as the 26th Category. Yet others count Time as the 26th Category and God as the 27th Category. 
135 
King. He is already directed, sire! by thy 
command. 
Pupil. -68. These Sankhyas, read in the perverted doctrines comprised under Yoga, prate that God's sovereignty is but reflection. The fit rejoinder to these also is the Vedic creed which recogniseth for the Godhead, the attributes of knowledge, power, strength, etc.' 
Senapati.--69. Lord! These poor adherents of Sankhya, now chastened, may be dismissed. Let now the Arya be set to the refutation of the Kānāda doctrines. 
King. He has already been so set to it (by our Guru) in the manner how best to overcome those who range themselves against Vedanta. 
Pupil. Great king! I shall do according to 
thy will. 
70. By conceptions such as the creation 
स्वाभाविकी ज्ञानबलकिया न । and such other Srutis 
proclaiming the Godhead. 
136 
of "non-being" (or non-ens), and by controversions of the methods1 of the Veda, the notoriety obtained for the School of Kānāda, by an Ulûka2 setting up a teaching, hath now passed off into mere memory3. 
Guru.-(Eyeing with regards.) 
Pupil.-(As if laughing):-But let (our) king 
mind this, the yet more strange ! 
King. What may that be? 
Pupil. These followers of the Kānāda School postulate Moksha (liberation) as a stony condition, per contra to Divine Likeness. In that case, glory be to Kumbhakarna, and his curse' prove a blessing. 
1. 
कथमसतस्सज्जायेत and such other Srutis proclaiming 
the Godhead. 
2. Some say that Rudra taught the Vaiseshika- 
Sastra to the Kanadas, assuming the form of an owl. Ulika is also the name of the sage of the Kānāda School. 
3. प्रसङ्गमात्रशेषितोऽभूत् । 
4. The curse referred to is the boon granted to 
137 
King.-Forsooth right! 
Senapati.-Lord! 
71. These Semi-Bauddhas (Kānadas etc.) have been brow-beaten by (our) Arya. Next have to be beaten these full (-fledged) Bauddhas who vituperate the Vedas. 
King. (With doubt.) Arya! Art thou prepared to subdue these Bauddhas, adepts as they are in juggling arguments ? 
Pupil. (A bit out of temper.) King! Acting under thy will as I do, all these combatants put together may fail before my single self. 
Thus :-- 
72. The dull Vaibhāshikas' boast that the cosmos is momentary: the Sautrāntikas' infer the objective universe to be but modifications of the mind; the Yogacharās aver this same 
cosmos as 
unreal; and the rest (the Madhyamikas',) 
Kumbhakarna, Ravana's brother, that he should enjoy eternal sleep. 
1. Different theorists of the Saugata (Buddhist) 
System of Philosophy. 
1. 
138 
assert that all is unreal (even mind). Hence, their mutually-conflicting theories, self-condemned, stand before me, these (doctrinaires), denuded of their boast. 
Again :- 
73. Stupid these, Dingnaga', etc., bidding for tusk-to-tusk (kind of) fight! But attend, your school-methods utterly collapse; for the Bauddhas fail in either case, whether, knowing what is to be taught, they venture on expositions, or unknowing-(i. e. in both cases, their argument for momentary doctrine fails). 
Founder of the Saugata-creed. There is also an implication in this thinker possessing the strength of the elephants, supporting the direc- 
tions ten of the Earth. 
2. The meaning is this:-If the present moment vanishes giving place to the next moment, then the teaching of the present moment vanishes, and it is useless; again if the present moment is existent, and the future or the next moment is nonexistent, the teaching also becomes non-existent. Hence, as in either case, if the teaching is to 
139 
Hence ours is the victory,-let trumpets 
be beaten ! 
Senapati. (Applauding). Lord! Hearing this Arya's tersely sublime and irresistible harangue, cordially appealing to the assembly, the vile Saugatas have fled in every direction, but Madhyamika alonethe leader of the van of the Bauddhasdisregardeth the accusation with temerity, parading his pedantry. He must in particular be uprooted for his bombasts thus :- 
1. 
74. Let the Vaibhāshika's oration enjoy peace; to the Santrantikas, well-wishings; let the Yogāchāras leave their means of proof: let alone the adherents of Sankara &c. who only follow' them (Yogacharas). But here emergeth this Madhyamika, bursting with his ability to make and unmake theories of non-entity, the upholder of the monistic doctrine of negation, hard to 
persist, the momentary doctrine must bo abandoned. 
Accepting Yogachara's doctrine अन्यत्सर्वममदिति । 
140 
win by unsophisticated arguments. He attempteth victory. 
King.-Arya! This disputatious Pandit-churl, the scholastic of 'total illusion' and advocate of negation,' should himself be relegated to negation'. 
Guru. --Lad! Ponder over this matter deliberately. 
Pupil. Why such deep deliberation? He argueth for himself eternal silence, by reckless arguments, akin to those, a son would employ for the barrenness of his mother. 
Further:- 
75. This wrangler (Madhyamika) standeth 
1. Anything that is unreal cannot be perceived or known by the sense, just as a man cannot say that his mother is a barren woman, for the very idea of barrenness connotes the fact of being sonless. Similarly the very idea of perception or knowledge implies the existence of a real object. To say that unreality alone is real is a contradiction of words. 
2. 
Who form only a sub-sect of Yogachara and who hold :विज्ञानमेव सत् ।141 
self-condemned, 
inasmuchas his own wit is unwitted by the arrows of his own self-contradicting arguments, opposing each other, and breaking down. There seemeth no occasion therefore to advance any more (on our part), for as much as that would be to club-beat one already 
beaten. 
(Behind the curtain), (A cry):- 
Devils! Devils!! 
Senapati.-Not so, not so. These are Digambaras with the mingled' (feelings of) joy and sorrow at the overthrow of the Saugata creed, and vetoers of the evidences of Perception and Inference. So do they dupe others. 
2. 
76. Dirt-smearing folk2 these, and pea- 
Digambaras. (a sect of the Jainas). 
मतां क्षणिकत्वनिरासेन सन्तोषः 
परमाणु कारणत्वनिरासेन विषाद: 
Dirty because they are afraid of taking a clean bath, lest they may hurt the vermin in the dirt of the body. 
142 
cock-feather-flourishers to beguile the unwary. Ashamed are they at their own odd doctrine of Sapta-bhangi', long ago exploded. 
Let this Arya be set to controvert these. 
King.-77. Where is controverting needed when by their own admission they affirm negation and negate affirmation? 
(Turning to the Guru.) Holy sire! These Philosophers who indulge in several tricks such as Sun-stopping, Rock-splitting, Doll-speaking, etc, shall be vanquished through thy grace alone. 
1. स्यादस्ति, (@) स्यान्नास्ति, (6) स्यादस्ति च नास्ति च, (1) स्यादवक्तव्यं (11) स्यादस्ति चावक्तव्यं च (१) स्यान्नास्ति चावक्तव्यं च, (/) स्यादस्ति च नास्ति चावक्तव्यं च ॥ (१) (a) If so it is. (b) If so it is not. (c) If so it is and it is not. (d) If so it cannot be described. (2) If it is so it cannot be described. (f) If it is not so it cannot be described. (y) If so and if it is not so it cannot be described. 
143 
Guru. -Great king! To such mischief-makers 
the king alone must assign punishment. 
Pupil.--(Smiling.) 
78. Rules of eating proper and improper (food) and canons of logic for defence of own, and accusation of other's, doctrines, they have abjured; and they know not their own defeat. As for punishment, the gods themselves,-angered by their denunciation of the Vedas-have inflicted punishment in the shape of (their resorting to the habit of painfully) pulling the hairs of the head1. 
Further punishment dependeth on 
thy majesty and the Guru. 
King.-Ah generall To sight them paineth. 
May they pass beyond my vision! 
Senapati. Lord! Blinded by thy glory-sum, they, like owls, hide themselves in hill 
The reference is to the prevalent custom of Jains refraining from shaving lest they should hurt the lice Hence they pluck the hair. repeating, Jina, Jina! 
144 
and sea-side caverns, the abodes of the aborigines. 
King. Who are these men again,-bearing un-vedic marks (on their persons) resembling the Kshapanakas (=Jains), engaged in severe austerities passing for eremites, and imitating the practices of the Pramatha-hosts'-who oppose the Vedas ? 
Guru.--Like stray-cattle stealing into the ricefields of Vedic-Dharma, these must be driven to a distance. 
Pupil. They, themselves, will stay far off. 
For:- 
79. Now that the turbulent professors of the doctrines of Kapila, Kānāda, Buddha, and the Hair-puller (Jina), have been befooled, these followers of the doctrines of Pasupati', designed by him to delude the offenders of Gautama, shall follow suite. 
1. Goblins attending on Rudra. 
2. Rudra. On an occasion of great famine which 
145 
Senapati.-Lord! These (Pasupatas) like the Digambaras (Jains) resent our Arya's words, and in order to encourage belief in their creed, resort to such strategems, as the producing of rain out of season (&c) 
lasted for 12 years, sage Gautama's hermitage was the only rain-fed area. All other sages 
found resort here to shelter themselves from famine. For a long time, the refugees enjoyed the hospitality of Gautama and he would not permit them to depart. Thereupon one set of these guests who wanted to return to their own hermitages, contrived a plan to get out of the place by creating a false cow which devastated Gautama's crops. Gautama enraged, burnt the cow by his mere look and the guests left Gautama's hermitage on the pretext that they could not stay with a cowkiller. Gantama came to know the true state of affairs through his 
and cursed them to be 
4 (eye of wisdom) 
ET: thus: 
त्रिपुण्डधारिणी यूयं भस्मोद्धूळनतत्पराः । 
भविष्यथ त्रयीबाह्या मिथ्याज्ञानप्रलापिनः ॥ 
Thas cursed, they invented a new faith called Pasupata-Tanten whose teachings are antagonistie 
to the Vedas. 
8. 9. 10 
146 
(Behind the curtain) (A coice):- 
"Run, run ". 
King.--Looks round, exclaiming What? what? 
General.Unnatural this! for, (surely) :- 
80. There loom the serried clouds. Can they be the brush for eye-collyriuming? Can they be the (stage-) curtain before the Lightning-actresses? Can they be the Yamuna to the celestial Gangā', or are they the Tamala grove fringing the shore of Ocean-sky, or are they the (dark) tresses of the Rain-damsels, or again may they not be the (dark) muskmark (on the forehead) of the East-maid? Nay, are they not again like the flowing floods proud-bubbling from the ichor of the Cupid-Elephant?? 
1. Ganga is white, and Yamuna is dark. Clouds 
being dark are said to be like Yamuna. 
2. Thus did the spectators of the magic clouds invented by the Pasupatas figure to themselves those clouds in various similies. 
147 
Further:- 
81. There issue from the bosom of these clouds. zephyrs-the offspring of winds, bearing the aroma of ambrosial honey freely flowing from the wildly-blossoming buds of Nipa-woods',-zephyrs so much relished by elephant-herds and wafting fragrance, fuming from rain-soaked earth. 
(All look flurried and wondering.) 
King. Holy sire! How (then) to counteract 
this (illusion)? 
Guru. - No effort on our part is needed! 
For:- 
82. Here is He, the Sun to Kaitabha- 
darkness, 
(He) the Gust driving the Madhu- 
1. Kadamba or a species of Asoka. 
dust, 
Vishun is compared to the Sun and his uprooting Kaitabha (the Demon) is compared to the sun's dispelling darkness. 
3. Vishnu is compared to the gust and his slaying 
148 
(He) the Cleaver' of the Hiranya- 
(He) the Feller of the Kalanemi- 
hill, 
tree,-in short 
(He) the Gulper of the Samsara-Sea, 
How then can feats of illusion not eradicated be? 
(Joying and Wondering). Anon all the quarters and sub-quarters of space clear up! 
Guru. What all not shall clear up, when the Holy, the Lover of votaries, deigneth? 
King.-Venerable sire! These are versed in the Sātvata3-sastra and seem to be at 
demon Madhu is compared to a gust of wind driving away dust. 
1. Demon Hiranya is spoken of as a hill and Vishnu's killing him is spoken of as cleaving it. (The incarnation of Nrisimba, Man-lion, is 
referred to here.) 
2. Demon Kālanemi is compared to a tree and Vishnu's destroying him is referred to as felling. 
3. Pancharatra Tantra, containing the direct oracles 
149 
one with the followers of Vêdānta-siddhānta; they have turned their minds away from the study of diverse trifling Vidyās and pure both within and without, like Svêtadvipa'-residents, are blest, walking the way of the Upanishad-wise. 
Further:- 
83. Deeply devoted to the Lord Supreme, these (versed in the Satvata-Tantra) have severed (their connection) from others, with hearts content with worship of the Lord. (of the description) Abhigamana', Upādānā, etc. Though the Deva-hosts prostrate to them, they, esteeming each other, owing to their clear perception of the 
of God. (Vide Pancharatras by Govindacharya in J. R. A. S. 1911.) 
White Island, chronicled to be in the centre of 
the Milky Sea. 
Collection of materials for worship 
2. 
Morning worship. 
3. 
4 
ef. Taittiriya Upanishad - 
तस्य देवा असन्वशे, सर्वस्मै देवा बलिमावहन्ति । 
vi far 
150 
Lord's glory, put down the puff of pride (which may on that account obsess them.) 
So then, is there anything in their system to rebut? 
Guru.-(Shaking his head and shutting his ears.) Nothing, nothing: (for):- 
84. Neither conflict nor objection riseth, when the Vedās and the Sātvata are compared. But for judges it is meet to dispel doubts that Skeptics may entertain,--such (doubts) occurring between (parts of) Vedās themselves. 
Pupil.--I shall dispel it. Wiseacres find fault, in some respects, with God-revealed Pāncharātras, as with other Tantras.2 
Listen:- 
85. May the Pāncharātra-word, incorporated with the Krita (age)-famed Vedas,- 
1. Shutting ears is a Hindu habit, meaning something untoward heard, or to be heard, or something inauspicious to ward off. 
2. Such as that of the Pasupata. 
3. This age is noted for the Supreme authority of the Vedas. Witness the verse quoted by151 
the creed espoused by men like ourselves, past-masters in spotless logic,-(the word) irradiated by rays streaming from the crestgems of Garutmān's pendants,' (when) as adept in Vedic essence, nodding his head, --(may this word) made authoritative by impartial souls (like Vyasa,) glory forth. 
As authoritative is the Sātvata (Pāncharātra) established by the Holy VyasaNarayana (Incarnate),--(Vyasa) deeply learnt in all the Vedas,-(Vyasa) who dispelled all the inner darkness of the worlds 
Sri Purnapragna 
in his Atharva opanishad 
Bhashya: - पञ्चरात्रमृगाद्याश्च सर्वमेकं पुराऽभवत् । 
मूलवेद इति ह्याख्या काले कृतयुगे तदा । 
Also एको वेदः कृते ह्यासीत् । 
1. Serpents nained Padma and Mahapadina. 
worn by Garuda as pendants. 
.) This is with reference to Vihagêsvara (Garutman) Sambita of the Pancharatras, listened 
to by nodding, when taught by the Guru. 
3. This is with reference to Vedanta-Sutras by 
Vyasa, such [II. 2. 8.] 
as 
Utpattyasambhavat 
etc. 
152 
by the moon-light of the MahābhārataMoon, born out of the Vedic sea, churned' by his wisdom. 
86. The Omniscient Himself (Nārayana) created this spotless Tantra, as salvation for us, slaves,-Nārayana of the (Holy) feet guarding the hundreds of the Vêda. And Pārāsarya, the sage, promulgated it by asserting that it is blessed, holy, and salutary.3 
Senapati.--Lord! Like another Vyāsa, hath he (the Pupil) established the PāncharātraTantra. 
King.--Holy sire! Are these followers of Prabhakara and Kumārila also to be defeated by thine disciple? 
1. Churning of the sea in the Fish-Avatara, when the Moon was born, is here the allusion from which the metaphor is taken. 
2. The son of Parāsara-Vyasa. 
3. Refering to इदं श्रेयं इदं पुण्यमिदं हितमनुत्तमम् । and 
other verses in the Narayaniya of the Moksha- 
Dharma in Santi Parva of the Mahabharata. 
153 
Guru. -Great king! As defenders of the Vedas but deserters of the Vedanta, they deserve to be extolled as well as condemned. 
Pupil.--(Jeeringly). 
1. 
87. 
Devoid of all defects as the Vedantas are, how in this assembly, can these follow the headless trunk, the Purvamimāmsa'? 
This indeed is the decision of the spiritual scientists, the vanguard of all the Vaidika-societies; viz., that Vishnuvotaries abstain, as from sin, from Kāmya2 Dharmas, and deeply engage in Nitya" and Naimittikas. Hence, savants (like Bôdāyana) postulate that Karma and Brahma (or Jnāna) Mimāmsas constitute together but one Science. 
Purva and Uttara Mimamsas, or the Karma and Jnana Kandas, constitute one Science. Hence the former without the latter is a headless trunk 
and hence lifeless. Vedanta is therefore SrutiSiras or the Head of the Vedas. 
2. Duties performed with some motive or reward 
other than the attainment of beatitude. 
3 Perpetual duties. 
4. Periodical duties. 
154 
King. (Pleased) Holy sire! 
By his exposition, faithful to teaching and congenial, hath thy disciple proved his creed of wisdom and disproved that of the others, as if firmly founding' a pillar, and hath thus relieved himself of all Vedanta-concern. But wedded to the Vedic coat, and yet weaned not from alien ways, as these (Kumārilas etc.) are, what is the retort for them? 
Guru.-(Smiling.) 
88. By cruel fate, have these missed the Vedic path; replete with ridicule are their utterances, their zest for them appealing only to their wives. How then can this earth brook their boast ? 
Pupil. -Great king! By the routing of the aliens (Bauddhas etc.) alone, have these (Kumārilas etc.) been uprooted. 
Thus then :- 
89. Installed as Yatipati2 is on the holy 
1. See n. 5, p. 97. 
2. Rāmānuja. 
155 
Vedic dais, in this world the Tāthāgata' -sayings slid away; the Kāpili' method sank somewhere; the Kānādā3-talk dissolved; the Druhina-and Hara-expositions lost all dignity; the Kaumārilaword famished; the Guru'-creed thrown far out by its own burden. Where then is alarm from Sankara and others"? 
Or:- 
I shall combat these (Sānkarites) who delude people with ideas of fulfilled fruition (such as Moksha) by an epidemie of inconceivable ambiguities', born of a seething turmoil of superficial imagination. 
(Clapping hands and laughing.) 
90. Influenced by nescience, these (Maya- 
1. Bauddha. 
3. 
2. Kapila (Sage.) 
Followers of Kānāda doctrine. 
4. Yoga. 
5. Pāşupata. 
6. 
Also called Bhatta briefly. 
7. 
Prabhakara. 
8. Yadava and Bhaskara are also implied here. 
9. Dogmas postulating nescience to Jiva 
वादिकल्पना 
अविद्याजी- 
156 
vādin's1) assert this cosmos to be categorised under what is not 12 (i. e., subjective), and what is not this (i.e., objective) This attempt seemneth a fairy castle built in the void. By such plausible but conflicting and out-Vindhyaic sort of hard gibberish, these deserve to be counted amongst the toadies fawning on a king, begot of a barren dame. 
Moreover:- 
91. Let sane men judge this, that by these self-same twaddlers of universal negation hath from the first been admitted that an object, full of holy, and reft of unholy, excellences (=God alone) is worshipworthy. Based thus then, as truth is, 
1. Philosophers who argue, assuming the existence 
of Māyā. 
2. ie., Noumenal Cosmos. 
3. ie., Phenomenal Cosmos. 
The cosmos is reduced to what is neither subjective nor objective. Hence the reduction is into Brahman as they think; but it becomes Non-entity. 
4. Far surpassing the hardness of Vindhya-Rock. 
1. 
157 
the vain contest conflicting with perceptive and other proofs for the Attributeless (Brahman tantamount to negation) becometh untenable. 
Hence, it is meet that Lakshmanāchārya' should incarnate in order to overthrow those Samanadhikarana-rivals, of the Maya" school, championed by a worldimposing Sankara, Meghanāda'-like,those doers of dark deeds, perpetually 
Double meaning in 1 to 5:- 
Lakshmana as Ramanuja ( Rama's brother) as against Indrajit, and Lakshmana (Rāmānuja) as against the Illusionist Sankara etc. 
Samanadhikarana Equal and unequal battle in one case; one substance by many 
attributes, in the other. 
3. Jugglery or sorcery in one case; Illusion 
doctrine in the other. 
4. 
Indrajit (Son of Ravana): Meghanada (thunder- 
voiced); 
5. Deeds under cover of darkness in one case 
nefarious deeds in the other. 
158 
spotted 'natures, the Brahma-Mimàmsins after (the pattern of) Kali. 
The Nitya-mukta theory of those who can only compare with the monistic Paundraka" deserve but eternal silence. 
Forsooth :- 
92. The man who essayeth to invent a (new or) non-existent Mukti for an ever-Mukta characterless essence (Soul or Brahman) may as well attempt to invent a new taste for the honey of a dreamflower. 
Judge (then) this Subhaga-bhikshuka 
1. Double meaning:-Brahmana pests in one case; misinterpretation of Brahma-Sutras in the other. 2. For the monists who assert identity with Brahman, there is no liberation at all, for it is ever-existent. 
3. An Asura named Paundraka. pretending identification with Krishna, imitated him. The pretender was eventually killed by Krishna. 4. सुभगाभिक्षुकन्याय - The maxim referred to here is the attitude of that mother-in-law, who, not approving of her daughter-in-law's refusal of 
159 
method of these Ràhu-mimàmsakas', kin to Rakshasas. For, having themselves discarded Vedanta, they traduce others (aliens), while vilifying themselves (so-called) Vedantius. 
Verily do we blush to try conclusions with these silly-talking folk, and feel as the person, who, when advising a dolt to have no Stage-fright" (Sabhākampa), would (be silly enough to) himself blubber "have no "frage-stright" (Bhasà-panka). 
The three-world-saving Srutis them- 
alms to a beggar. would call him back. only to tell him herself that she cannot on any account give him alms; i.e., the right of refusal was an usurpation by the daughter-in-law. Hence the application of this maxim here is thus: -The Bauddhas reject the Vedanta but the Advaitins call in the Vedanta to their doors again only to Ile have the right to reject you and not the Bauddhas." 
Say! 
1. Trunkless head (as Rahu is) as opposed to two 
trunk or Ketu or the Kabandha-minimsakas). 
Mayāvadins:मायिन:पूर्वोत्तरमीमांसयोरे कावयवि त्वंऽपि वेदशिरोभागविचाररूपोत्तरमीमांसामावाङ्गीकारात 
160 
selves refute them best. The fourfold means of Moksha, these fourth-yuga Sanyāsins-pirates of the triune Truism, Vedic Chid-Achid-Isvara'-assert, the wise mockingly understand antinomically thus:- 
(1) For (Nityànitya-vastu-vivêka) - Discrimination as 'to what is Eternal and what is not Eternal> <<(Tatvà tatva-vicharabhava) -Want of discrimination as to what is 
Truth and what is not Truth. 
(2) For (Sama-damādi-sadhana sampat)== The good means viz. control of senses, internal, external, etc.><(Ràga-dveshadi sadhana sampat)=The means of love, hate, etc. 
(3) For (Ihàmutra-phala-bhoga-virāga)= Abandonment of the pleasures of this and the world to come> <(Laukika-vaidikakarmānushthàna-vaimukhya)Abjuration of doing good works, temporal and spiritual. 
1. The Visishtadvaitic thesis of the Vedanta viz. Soul, Non-soul and God together constituting One Substance.161 
(4) For (Mamukshutva)-Love of Liberation><(Bubhukshutva)= Love of lust. 
Guru.--Good pupi!! What good is it barping on 
this ? 
Pupil. Holy sire! (Then) I shall rebut the 
other variants (of this Advaitic doctrine.) 
93. If Bhaskara and Yadava-prakasa could be adepts in determining the real position of the Vedanta, what affront is imputable to the other protagonists' (Jainas etc,) experts in expounding self-contradictions P 
It is for this reason then we hear that in the manner the Absolute Brahmanupholders (Sankara etc.) are held to be pseudo-Bauddhas, these (Bhaskara and Yadavaj also are held to be Jaina'-smacking Vedantins. 
1. Buddha, Jinā, etc., 
2 
phoiders of Brahman divorced of every atribute -or the subjective Idealists. 
3 प्रच्छन्नबौद्धाः 
4 
कस्यापि वस्तुनः एकस्यानङ्गीकारात् जैनगन्धित्वं 
s. 11 
162 
But this is the quintessence of all the Upanishads, (thus) : 
:- 
94. The Bheda'-texts proclaim relative differences amongst the Verities', and the holy Aikya-texts are significant by their relative Unity. And to support both these senses, other scriptural texts declare the Verity (to be) the Cosmos-Immanent Over-Lord-the Lakshmi-Lord. 
King.-0, Brahmana best! 
95. Wise thou art, that by thee, this (Kali-)age, vitiated as it is by the (threefold) 
1. Bheda Duality Dvaita: 
प्रेरितारं च मत्वा &c. 
2. Verities or Categories are 
3 
(a) Matter-non-soul. 
(b) Soul, and 
(c) God, all the three existing as a Unity-inDifference, ie., iu Visishtadvaitic Unison, or in indiscerptible relation together. 
Aikya-MonisticAdvaitaICE ZEL 
4. : faga (Ghataka Sruti)Reconciling or 
harmonising texts. 
163 
heretics,-Tatva1-lost, 
Vritta'-lost, and 
both-lost",-hath into Krita-nge been 
transmuted. 
Pupil. Great king! All that, by the grace 
of this Acharya. 
and 
96. What by Kānāda-methods, Kapila-designed drama, what by Kumārila's jargons and Guru-tied knots, what (again) by Tathagata-rigmaroles and others' ravings, was the world imposed upon, hath all now, by Yatindra's deliverances, been restored to sense. 
Further :- 
97. The verdicts of the Mani-lord (= Rāmānuja) which act as the moon-light 
1. Those who have missed the true perception of 
Verity (Reality) Bhatta etc. 
2. 
Those who have missed the true virtuous practice 
or conduct (Achara) Sankara, etc. 
3 
Both (1) and (2) absent z., neither perceivers of truth nor knowers of good conduct 
Charvaka. 
etc. 
164 
to the (blue) lotus'-garden of Vaikunthalove, provoke (in all) yearning for deathless deliverance. They are like the sun risen, piercing into the eyes of those owls, viz., the synod that revels in the night of its own school. 
Senapati. My lord! 
98. Master of speech, veteran of worddebate, victor over factions, this (Arya) meriteth honors. 
Pupil.-General ! 
99. By this Acharya's grace, by this king's favor and by thy appreciation too, have I already been honored. 
King.--Holy sire! Fair and sweet speaketh he. 
Senapati. But then. 
100. Him, the victor in this assembly proved, this holy Guru's disciple, dight with his (Gurn's) love, I should like to honor. 
The blue lotus blossoms at the appearance of the Moon, like the red lotus, at that of the Sun. 
165 
Pupil.--Great king! This holy sire deserveth it. 
Guru.--Thou too, (pupil !) by my mandate. 
King.-Holy sire! 
101. He (thy disciple) hath stoutly defended Vedanta. He hath also spread the knowledge of Truth. Gladly, I bid diminutive Dindimas to be drummed in all directions. May he wear this gold bangle round his left foot, to serve as the toyish skull-splitter of those noisy wiseacre foes, firm in the faded farrago of their teachings. 
(Thus saying presents the bangle.) 
Pupil. - (Turns to the Guru-for permission-) 
Guru. -So be it. Irrefragable forsooth is the 
King's flat. 
Pupil. With thy permission, holy sire! 
(So saying accepts the bangle.) 
Guru.-Long-lived! Attend to this, what hence. 
forward thou shalt do:- 
1. A species of kettle-drum. 
102. Coveting 
166 
no honor, fame or 
wealth, gracious unto (thy) disciples, eager to learn, be engaged, as long as thy body lasteth, in the promulgation of the SārîrakaScience1, supported by sound logic. 
Pupil.-Aye, as the holy sire directeth. 
(Behind the curtain.) 
Avaunt! 
Avaunt! 'Sdeath! What 
disaster hath befallen ! 
For:- 
103. These demons of dolts, Moha's slaves, called Rāga and Dvesha (Lust and Hate). afore referred to have emerged, in order (after all) to bind irresistibly Virakti with Vishnu-bhakti. 
(Alarmed, all listen.) 
King. -Holy sire! In our attempt to suppress (ghosts), those very ghosts start 
up; 
1 The Brahma-Sutras and their right Commen- 
taries based on the Upanishads. 
2. 
Dispassion or Renunciation. 
3. Devotion or Love to Vishnu. 
167 
Endeavour for what best may be done for success. We shall also now strive to totally uproot our foes' might. 
(Thus exeunt all.) 
FiniAct II, termed Parapaksha-Pratikshêpa (Refutation of opponents.) 
AUM. 
ÔM-A-U-M) 
SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 
ACT III. 
THEN ENTER RAGA AND DVESHA". 
Raga.--Friend! With thee for my help. the 
achievement of my master's 
I fancy, as (already) accomplished. 
mission, 
Dvesha. Companion! I am in the same boat with thee, as I am ordered by his Majesty to create obstacles against the efforts of Viveka, who worketh against thee. 
Raga.Friend! Other mandates (too) there are to carry out as occasion may demand. I shall just disclose them. 
1. 
Lust-Attachment to wordliness. 
2. Hate-for Godliness. 
1. 
169 
1. Now that the heretics1 have been of overthrown through the manœuvre Vivêka, the way to Trivarga is the only outlet for Mahāmôha's energies. Beggarly Virakti3, I shall just decoy to a distance, and thou shalt entice Vishnu-bhakti all 
at once. 
Their disjunction with Jiva can be, by all means, effected, by casting the nets of making Svarga appear worthy and Moksha unworthy,-in all places. Expert as I am in a thousand and one deceits, I shall just beguile the beggarly Virakti, as Mārîcha 
Buddhists and others. 
2. See n. 1. p. 115. 
3. 
Dispassion or Renunciation. 
4. Love or Devotion to Vishnu. 
5. The allusion is to the well known incident of Maricha being asked by Ravana to decoy Sri Rama into the Dandaka forest. Maricha assumed the form of a golden deer and appeared in the vicinity of Sitā, who, enchanted by its charming appearance, persisted in Rama catching the same Rama was decoyed to a distance by Maricha, when Ravana enticed away Sita (Aranya-Kanda-Sri Ramayana. 
170 
did Mithili' and thou shalt entice VishnuBhakti as Pôulastya' did. 
Dvesha. Then what? 
Raga. True, the Teachers of Vedanta Siddhānta hath routed the head-less Pûrvamimāmsakas, the foremost of the wishers of Mahāmôha's 
success-the very Purobits of demon Hiranya as it were re-incarnate on earth, yet I shall propound their very creed ingeniously and thus accomplish my 
master's mission. 
Dvesha. Rightly opportune is thy resolve to stand by the victorious banner of the arch-chiefs of Mahamôha promoting Atheism, viz., the creed of Nirisvara Mîmāmsa. 
Raga. 2. If it becometh a passion to long 
1. Another name of Sitā. 
2. Rāvana. 
3. The pupil referred to in the previous Act. (Vāda.) 
Officiating Priests. 
4. 
5. 
The demon killed by Vishnu in is avatara of 
man-lion. 
6. Materialism denying the God-head.171 
after the paltry and ephemeral pleasures' how can dispassion possess one who longeth for endless and eternal joy ?2 
3. It is mistaken to aver that beatitude is Self-realisation; but if beatitude be one intercoursing with another, then what else but Kāma' can best constitute what is called beatitude (Moksha), coveted by one and all? Beatitude therefore can be no other than Svarga, the seat of all (carnal) enjoyments at will, and this view is supported by the authority of our betters, the NirisvaraMimamsakas (Godless philosophers). 
Dvesha. Indeed! It is this that is accepted to be the final decision, arrived at after a careful study of the traditions of Mahāmôha, by savants well-versed in Mahāmôha's lore*. 
1. Enjoyment of Svarga, etc, 
2. 
3 
Moksha. 
स्वम्वम्यम्य नित्यप्रामत्वेन उपायोपदेश वैयर्थ्यात्मुिखरूपत्वादर्श- 
नाच. 
4. 
Atheism and Hedonism. 
172 
4. Misery is expelled not, if beatitude be the attainment of Glory (Brahman) conjoin- 
ed again with mind (soul) and matter (non-soul). But if beatitude be the attainment of Glory (Brahman), denuded of all this, then it is no joy at all. And then the Vedic conclusion becometh but a mere verbal expression." 
Raga. Well spoken, friend! Like the exodus 
of the swarm of birds from their nests in the hollow of a branch of a tree, burning with wild fire, surely this utterance of thine will drive Vishnu bhakti to a distance. How now is this stupid Vivêka going to create for Jiva a diversion from Samsara,-Jiva whose mind is blinded by his eagerness for enjoyment eternal? The 
1. The attainment of a Brahman with attributes, mind and matter (the body of God) must still give one the continuance of worldly experiences, for according to the Visishtadvaita doctrine, God is never separable from the cosmos, for it is His ever-united body. 
2. An attributeless Brahman is only non-existent 
like the haro's horn. 
173 
more that Viveka becometh anxious to condemn the graces par excellence of damsels, celestial and mundane, the more shall he be bound firm by those ropes', (damsels). Just view the nectar-born, lotus-eyed, damsels,the ornaments of Svarga. 
5. Their bosom is beseiged by their everexpanding bud-like breasts; their eyes, stealing the loveliness of blue lotuses, long to tresspass on their ears; Hallo! possessed is their entire frame by emotions whose preceptor is Cupid (himself)! Methinks the whole universe is designed vanquished by the lovely seductive youth of slenderwaisted damsels ! 
But apart from the exuberance of fresh-blossoming juvenility, witness their amorous display! 
6. Their eyebrows, Cupid's victorious penons, gesticulate that the true end of life is lust, their gait condemneth that 
1. Also means qualities. 
- The period when maiden-hood and youth 
meet. 
174 
every other goal of life is vile; their eyes, lovely with the moving pupils and excited by excessive passion, proclaim the truth of the Kāma'-Sastra that the only true Brahman is Kama (Lust or carnal enjoyments). 
Dvesha.-(With joy and impatience). 
Friend! What a pity it is that even the erudite indulge in the unpalatable prattle that there be a bliss beyond the enjoyment of the celestial wenches.-enjoyment which is understood by some sages as Moksha itself,-the mark of the highest bliss, according to the votaries of thy creed who are thoroughly conversant with the relative differences of the diverse Ends of Life (purush-ārtha) and who always pursue (the End) Kama! 
7. How shall the 
1. ef. कामस्तदसमवर्तताधि. 
All-sustainer" 
be 
9 If God sustains and permeates everything, it follows that he permeates sin as well and it is hence a contradiction to say that he is free from all sins. 
175 
uncontaminated with sin, and how again the Lord, the All-Desirer be free from desire? 
Raga. -Friend! This is not the whole of it. 
8. Some fiendish people would dupe the simple folk and make them believe that the pair of breasts, honey-full, of lovely looking damsels, surpassing the loveliness of golden globes, are but (lumps of) flesh. 
(A voice in the air). 
What saidst thou, Raya? What I said cannot be denied, for, only the blind behold not the purity of clear water! 
Dvesha. Ala! Strange indeed is this attachment of the fiendish followers of Viveka towards Brahman! Perhaps it is but proper-for, to the deaf, the cuckoo's cooing can certainly create no emotion. But never mind these, Virêka himself shall be vanquished. 
As evidenced by Krishna owning 60.000 wives 
176 
For:- 
9. The victory over Viveka's adherents followeth as a matter of natural sequence from the victory over Viveka (himself), for, doth not the creeper wither of its accord when its prop-poplar is felled down ? 
Raga-Well conceived! 
Dvesha.(Laughing aloud). 
own 
10. So long as I exist, surely this Vivéka whose wits are blinded by wallowing in the barren regions of the Upanishads, shall never attain the faultless. blessed, matchless, adorable supreme Brahman,-Brahman that hath in Him the gift of all Ends of Life'. 
(Behind the curtain). 
Who is that? Who is that? 
(Bath listen, with fear and confusion). 
Alas! what mishap! What may befall us who are intent on executing our master's command? Alas! Our luck would seem to 
take a new turn now! 
177 
11. Mark! Virakti and Vishnu-Bhakti have escaped from the inextricable net1 but-spread by us and are retracing their steps towards Vivêka. 
He who, facing us, cometh yonder, cheered by Virakti and Vishnu-Bhakti and led by the arm by Sumati is surely none but Viveka; in his presence whom victory favoureth, we unfortunates should not make a stand. For, if life exists, good things come. Our younger brothren Kāma and Krodha, capable of accomplishing our master's mission in a trice, also must tarry a while, for, in good time, all will he well. None is invincible to this Viveka, assisted (as he is) by Vyavasaya. Thus nay our royal mission land in jeopardy. 12. Fie, Fie, on Indra's heavenly 
harlot's rolling looks! Fie, Fie, on Cupid's bow betwanging 
the pompous twang in battles! Fie, Fie, on cuckoo's penta-chorded 
tunes! 
1. 
The aforesaid net of imputing sin to Moksha. 
S. s. 12 
178 
Fie, Fie, on Royal Moha's chivalrous 
pomp-dancing on Kāma-Sastra 
stage! 
Why mention more of matters more 
For, Now:- 
inert? 
13. Vanquishing Môha soon, like Indra, 
The head-demon-Vivêka releaseth 
quick from Samsara Jiva enbound. Srutis' tears of grief, by insult made 
to shed,. 
Transformeth he to tears of joy. 
(Thus saying exeunt.) 
Pure Interlude ends. 
THEN ENTER VIVEKA AND SUMATI. 
Viveka. - Queen mine! Take heart, take heart. Virakti and Vishnu Bhakti have just been made to join thee, their fears caused by the thieves', incited by Mahamoha. 
1. Raga and Dresba are sarcastically called thieves- 
here. 
179 
having now been dispelled. 
Sumati.--(Sobbing.) My lord! Still troubled is my mind as to what shall happen. What shall I say? Do not Rāga and Dvêsha lie in ambush and, wait for an opportunity? 
Viveka. Ah timid lady! Be not so weak in heart. Can Rāga and Dvêsha have room even in our presence ? 
14. Young dame! Enough of thy wailings, due to the recollection of rambles in unworthy paths! The Sārnga'-bowed Krishna, the Preacher of sublime Gîta to a fit disciple shall surely protect us, who seek His refuge. 
Sumati.-(With sorrow, using Samskrit). 
15. 
Aryaputra! Jiva, methinks, is much to be pitied, like a half-burnt live tree, in his state of grief, of inaction, of beastlike dependence, in the different stages of creation. annihilation, experience of 
1. Name of the bow of Vishnu. 2. Arjuna. 
:180 
2 
Svarga and Naraka, waking, dreaming, sleeping, swooning and agony of death. 
Besides :- 
16. Jiva doth wander in this Samsāra, made horrid by dotage, death, and fleeting sweet youth and by the manifold inter-related sins, flowing like the flood of the wild torrent, wherein the miraculously quick cosmic Creator seemeth to have distinguished the different Karmas by the force of his hurricaneLila3. 
Viveka. (With remorse.) Queen! 
What thou hast till now said is true. But listen to me now describing the long-accumulated Punya' of the Jiva which maketh him long to trod in the Never-to-return Path.5 
1. Abode of the Devas. 
2. Hell. 
3. See n. 1, p. 63. 
4. 
Virtue. 
5. Archirādimarga-The path, leading to Moksha, led by the messengers of the Lord, and which finally shuts off rebirth.181 
17. With his predisposition for a sojourn in Svarga, countered however by the frequent spectacle of the falls therefrom, the mind of Jiva doth engender in him an infinite thirst for the Para-Brahman'. Even if this thirst at times becometh languid by mental weakness, it is again revived and it firmly establisheth in Jiva a penchant for either Bhakti or Prapatti' according to his personal aptitude. 
Further :- 
18. Jiva, by sole decree of fortune, shall acquire an intense love for the ParaBrahman', engendered by the correct understanding of His Blessed Attributes, devoid of all defect, and shall know the natural difference in results, existing in the knowledge of the diverse Vidyas, the one as equally congenial as the other, like the different nectar-waves. 
Then, the Jiva, like the bee, shall enjoy the honey of Parama-purusha's' lotus-Feet 
1. Supreme Lord. 
2. Taking refuge on God. 
182 
and shall look upon even the Devacity ās but a hell. 
19. Here, the moment Jiva casteth away his attachment to Samsara, on account of bis recollection of his endless wanderings, an eager longing to attain the Supreme Brahman doth seize him through the knowledge of His singular attributes, and he then doth rightly indulge in the study of the several groups of sciences, relating to Godhead, pure, and devoid of all delusions and by discerning as to which of the manifold attributes of God are specifically dealt with and which not in any particular science (thereof). 
I shall just dwell in brief on the methods of overcoming this illusion. 
20. Môksia, reached through a knowledge of the different (God) Sciences' is either one or many. If they are one, the *!!! existence of several sciences is not justified, 
1. Nana-Vidyas the varied ways of divine medi- 
tation which are 32 such as fal, etc. 
183 
as one of them alone may bring about Moksha. If they are many, there may be a durational difference etc., in their enjoyment, like the difference attributed by the Mimāmsakās to the enjoyment of Svarga, and the existence of several (God)' sciences is then justified. This fallacious argument of the babblers who do not understand correctly the meanings of the Pramanas which re-iterate, that difference there is none, either in time or enjoyment in Moksha, but only among the (God)1 sciences which treat of this end,--fails, through its lack of sense. 
In spite of this, those who err, will ever err. For, even if the 
crows are 
washed with thousands of water-pots, they shall never turn white. The virtuous, will with no hesitation understand the truth propounded by those who apprehend the truth of God and who abjure the whole conclave of agnostics, and will attain Sarvesvara.1 
1. See n. 1, p. 182. 2. Authorities. 3 Vyasa, Badha- 
yana. Nathamuni, etc. 1. The Lord of all power. 
184 
Sumati:-(With approbation) My lord! 
Restored am I now, by thy language, disclosing a leaning for sound authorities. Umparallelled indeed is thy greatness in sifting the drift of Pramanas, by savants respect-worthy. 
For :- 
21. Now the Naga' damsels, residing in mountain-caves on ocean-shore, sing aloud thy fame, which shineth like the moon, washed of her stain by the billows of the Gangā, on the crest of Siva, when he is disturbed by his dreadful Delugedance, and they get delighted at the perennial How of nectar, exuding from each letter of the alphabet, making up thy praise! 
(Pondering on the glory of Vedantasastra, with joy and thrilling sensation.) 
22. These (God) sciences, through the knowledge of part of which, Jiva, 
1. Serpent. 
185 
tormented by samsāra-fire, doth feel that Moksha already percheth on his palm', even when this carnal body-the seat of all illusions-doth exist, thrive through the ever-expanding Madhusudana's grace that is so cool and clear, pure and pleasing, like the celestial waves of Gangā. 
Viveka. -What sayest thou? The burden of 
the care of Jiva is now indeed practically lightened. For, his Virāgya, springing from his desire to vision Brahman, conduceth in a greater measure to help towards (God) sciences, than that Virāgya which springeth from the knowledge of the ills of Samsāra. 
23. Relinquishing Prohibited (Nishedha) and Optional (Kimya') duties which are not required to apprehend the (God) 
1. हस्तमध्यनिहित. 
2. Vishnu. 
3. See n. 2, p. 166. 4. See n. 2, p. 153. 
186 
sciences, the Jiva performeth the Nitya' and Naimittika' duties for the sole pleasure of Para-Brahman, and delighted with the doing of these duties, he now hasteneth to fix his mind in Yoga, made blissful by currents of fresh nectar, flowing in the milky ocean of devotion, directed to the Divine Presence of the Para-Brahman-the Seat of all bliss.3 
24. Further, when Jiva-abashed--museth in his mind about the unreal nature of sense-delights, resembling but a Gandharvacity, I stretch out to him my helping hand and he quickly tideth over the perplexities of mind and doth fix the same exclusively on the Para-Brahman, thus easily crossing the Samsāric-ocean, as if it did cover a cow foot-space". 
Sumati.--(Musing). 
1. 
2. 
Still, when even the Prajapati and other great Yogis are themselves entangled by the fish hook-like 
and 2. See notes 3 and 4, p. 153. 
शुभाश्रयत्व. 
4. गोष्पद. 
3. 
मेघचित्र. 
5. The creator. 
187 
sense-lusts, my mind feeleth the humiliating doubt as to how Jiva, who resembleth the child out-stretching its hand to catch the 
noon, shall ever attain Moksha. 
Viveka. -Timid dame! Knowing, as thou art, the whole truth, how is it that thou dost indulge in doubts, like a witless woman? 
25. A certain resolute person, who hath detached himself from Samsāra, renounceth all external sense-pleasures, as if it were honey-mixed poison, setteth his face against the finitely blissful Kaivalya,' and even in this world evinceth fitfully an intense longing for the enjoyment of the infinite and eternally blissful Brahman. 
It is but natural that a ripe fruit, which even an expert who hath climbed up the branch of a tree cannot pluck, falleth before a way-farer-a result of the strength of mere matured' merit, expecting no effort on his part. 
1. Soul Isolation. 
2. सुकूनपरिपाक. 
188 
Besides :- 
26. If Jiva himself longeth to attain Paramapada,' resorted to by Nityasûris, atoneth for all past sins, and abstaineth from committing further sins, and if the benevolent-natured Isvara fixeth His will on a goal, what could not all be Jiva's own? Sure as anything, he attaineth liberation ! 
Sumati. My lord! If Jiva doth thus cross the 
1 
Samsāric ocean, how then doth he (meanwhile endure agony, like a worm in the hollow between the two ends of a tree burning with wild fire, like an antelope surrounded by a pack of hounds, like a caravan of traders in a ship tossed by a stormy tempest, like a jackal blinking in a flood-begirt islet, like a house-holder in dread hard-breathing at the ingress of a huge cobra inside the house, like the trunk of a rootless tree battered by the waves of 
1. Moksha. 
2. Eternally freed souls. 
189 
the Gangā, and like the fish in the oceanmidst molested by the shafts of Sri Rāma ? 
Viveka... Charming dame! Thou betrayest but childishness, casting (to the winds) thy erudition. For, thou fanciest that the Jíva, who is yet to be liberated, as if already liberated. 
Behold! Behold !! 
3 
27. Caste, Order, Conduct, Place, Time," etc. described in the Sāstras as highly conducive to, and as being the causes of, Moksha, shall in the case of listless minds prove but a perpetual source of fear," 
I will now prove to thy mind the relative difference that will be felt by others (of a different mould of mind). 
1. Brahmana etc. 
2. 
Brahmacharya, etc. 
3. Satyavrata, etc. 
4. 
Uttarayana, etc. 
5. 
6. 
Fear of Samsara 
Attentive minds. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
190 
and 
28. To the Jiva, who well discerneth the difference between Kamya duties. Nitya and Nimittika duties,-who is not indifferent and who performeth everything after due investigation, and eager that no obstacles shall bar the enjoyment of ParaBrahman, even those causes of fear transmute to absence of fear. 
Unaccountably then to assert that even the wise should indulge in fear till actual emancipation (is reached) is like trying to smell the fragrance of the lotus blossoming in the sky. 
29. To a person who perceiveth the possibilities involved in the perennial and strange windings of evil Karma, what not shall operate as the cause of fear, whether it be direction, or place, or time, whether 
Caste, Order, etc. 
No such fear has any foundation. 
The implication is that everything will operate as the cause of fear unless perceived properly. ७. कालेष्वपि च सर्वेषु दिक्षु सर्वासु चाच्युत 
शरीरे च गतौ चापि वर्त्तते मे महत्भयम् ॥ [Jitantà.]191 
it be commission of prohibited duties and omission of ordained duties, whether it 
be 'the body etc,-these though the means to achieve his longed-for object? 
Sumati.If indeed everything be the source of fear, then how shall Yoga, achievable only in the absence of fear, become successfit ? 
Viveka. Charming lady! Rightly hast thou questioned. There is a certain subtle truth of which, though thou knowest already, I shall only remind, thee. Listen then with attention undistracted. 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! Proceed. 
30. Renouncing the Lord's grace, which is as it were the cataclysmic-fire to the evergrowing infatuation of the mind and which swalloweth the oceans of sin, riding a bad horse of Karma, is as futile as the erection of a salt dam across the brackish ocean 
Just hear the success, beggaring all description. of the person who betaketh 
192 
himself with one-ness of purpose to the grace of the Eternal Lord. 
31. Longing seclusion, hating all sensedictates, all evil propensities for enjoyment suppressed by the force of Virakti, Jiva, the speeder in the path of Nivritti'-path shall focus all attention and take refuge under Sri Murāri's feet and thus, transgressing Samsara, attain liberation. 
Sumati. Rightly so. I shall just ask thee who hast so thoroughly grasped the truth of truths one thing more. Why is not the realisation of Moksha swiftly accomplished even by high-souled men with a thorough comprehension of the inmost truths of Upanishads, learnt at the hands of spotless Achāryas,-men who have uprooted opposite creeds, who have given up the tendency to indulge in Svargic sojourn, who have set their hearts on the great bliss of the worship of Madhusudana's blessed feet, 
1. See n. 3, p 21. 2. See n. 4, p 28. 3. See n. 2, p 55. 
193 
exempt from the faintest trace of stain, who have betaken to Nivritti-dharma' without the slightest inattention and who know no obstacles? 
Viveka. Lady dear! I shall just unfold 
to thee another subtle truth, fit to be treasured up by the wise in their hearts. Hear me with unalloyed attention what the great Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumāra, Nārada, Sāndilya and other Paramekāntins2 have often propounded. 
32. The thousand-yojana" whale doth consume a hundred-yojana whale; the bigger whale doth swallow even this thousand-yojana whale and the still bigger whale doth gulp down even the aforesaid whale ; such then is the course of Karma. The insult offered to an innocent perceiver of Brahman, shall consume, Agastya-like, 
1. See n. 3, p 21. 
Exclusive enjoyers of Brahman. 
3. Eight miles. 
s. s. 13 
194 
even Nivritti-dharma,-Agastya who displayed himself in exsiccating the great ocean of all sins. 
Listen to some other truths (also) similar. 
33. Well known it is that a great sinner is he who doth forget the good done in the past,' but a still worse sinner is he who doth forget the good done in the present and the worst sinner of all is he who will forget the good that in the future will be done. 
Sumati.-Musing) Lord! Such indeed is the unique heinousness of the sin of insulting the true realiser of Brahman, so ably elucidated by thee. 
Is there then no remedy for this sin? 
Viveka.-There is but one remedy and that is seeking the pardon of the one that was insulted. 
1. cf. ब्रह्मनेच सुरापेच चोरे भगवते तदा । 
निष्कृतिर्विहिता सद्भिः कृतघ्नेनास्ति निष्कृतिः ॥ 
195 
For:- 
34. An aquatic animal' falleth into great anguish by being out of water, but the same doth revive by water gradually gained. Similarly, the Jíva, cast away by the insult offered to the great, falleth into Samsara and getteth true knowledge back by resorting to the very person. 
Besides :- 
35. A person, deserved by good deeds done during diverse births and who hath refrained from sinning against the godly, dame Vidya, leading to Môksha, approacheth anon with love abundant. 
36. Para-bhakti,-the ship, as it were, to cross the ocean of Samsara, well fastened by ropes of Sātrika-tydya', so helpful to Nivrittidharma, saileth clear and acquireth momentum day by day. 
Fist, to wit. 
Vidya is personified here as a woman. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Devotion towards the Brabinan. 
4. See n. 2, p. 21. 
196 
Sumati. (Musing) Rightly so, if Anima', 
Mahima, Garimā, Laghima', Vasitva"," Isîtva, Prāpti', Prākāmya, etc. ordained by dire Destiny to a person who is yet not quite exempt from all past sins and which are capable of being used for Môksha, do not therefore impede the means by which Môksha is reached. 
Viveka.-Queen! True. The ever-hostile obstacles to (God-) Yoga are indeed difficult to surmount. The attainment of Moksha will be unfettered only if these Yogaobstacles are prevented from appearing at all, instead of renouncing them after they actually occur. 
(Then enter a messenger with palm leaf adorning his head). 
1. Atomicness. 
2. Greatness. 
3. Heaviness. 
4. Lightness. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Self-Control. 
Lordliness. 
Power to reach the desired place. 
S. Realisation of desires by mere thought. 
197 
Messenger.-(With hands suppliant.) 
King! This messenger-myself, named Samvriti-satya1 who never escapeth the eye of my suzerain lord Mahāmôha, whose movements are everywhere unobstructed, saluteth thee with thy queen. 
Viveka. -(Aside). Why hath he come here? 
(Aloud, in humour). May thou live long, but without casting away thy nature, ever addicted to perverse understanding. 
Messenger.-(Pointing to the palm leaf, in his suppliant hands, taken from his head). Great king! This indeed is an irrefragable mandate, indited by the Accountant Lobha and brought to thee by me, who am in the confidence of my lord Mahāmoha,-the emperor of the fourteen worlds, whose affairs are all determined by his minister Dvāpara3, and who is established in the faith of Durmati1. 
1. Posing as the speaker of truth but not really 
speaking truth. 
3. Doubt. 
2. 
Greed. 
4. 
Evil sense. 
198 
Viveka. With concealed contempt). 
Man! Thou art acceptable to us as well; hence read the message in all privacy. 
Messenger. As thy Majesty commands. 
(Reads the message humbly). 
37. Thus (runneth) the mandate of Mahàmôha, so esteemed by Kàma and others. It is also not obnoxious to the residents of Svarga, who are repugnant' to the decline of Samsāra. 
Viveka.-(Interrupting and smiling) Queen! Mark that we are treated as objects of wicked Mahāmôha's commands ! But just to know the enemy's mind, we should hear the rest of the message. Well then, messenger! proceed. 
1. The idea here is that the Devas resident in Svarga fear that the Samsara will decline, if Vivêka is given free scope for the spread of Vairagya, which would eventually minimise their own enjoyment. 
199 
Messenger." We forgive thee for all thy mischief ending with creating faith in the worship of the Para-Brahman, if it (mischief) bringeth about the realisation. of (sense-) delights ". 
Viveka. (Gesturing contempt). 
Lady! Dost thou hear the strange Bhikshupa aprasarana method' ? Or it becometh Mahāmôha, bent upon carrying out his wish, unyieldingly like the corpse's clenched fist. 
Sumati.-Yes, so it is. 
Viveka. And then ? 
Messenger. -38. "If thou dost transgress 
what we are going to bid, our veteran warrior Krodha and others, inflamed at the mere sign of our brows' knit will arrest thee and thou shalt exist no more 
He took 
on the 
certain beggar besought of a householder some standing room in the verandah. advantage of it, gradually encroaching on whole house. Introducing the thin the wedge", in other words. 
end of 
200 
Viveka. Love mine! That is a blessing to us, who follow our own (ordained) duties. Ah, Moha's messenger! yet anything remaining of the message? 
Messenger.-There is something yet on the subject of the prowess of the chieftains Kama, Kródha, etc. 
Viveka. --What harm can there be? Let us hear 
it also. 
Messenger.-39. "Whose valour shall subjugate 
Kama, the matchless warrior of the universe, the one so respected by the immortals,Kama the power of whose greatness metamorphosed even Siva's third eye, burning with anger, into an eye, cooled with the erotic sentiment of love?" 
40. "The ancient Sruti' proclaimeth that Kāma did exist even before creation. Through the power of Kāma alone, even the First Being sporteth in creation, sustentation and dissolution of the universe; 
1. cf. कामस्तदग्रे समवर्त्तताधि । सोऽकामयत बहुभ्यां प्रजायै ।201 
even he who is free of all desire doth difficult Moksha attain by Kama (desire) only. How then is Kāma under the influence of any body and who not is under the influence of Kāma in this 
universe ?" 
Sumati.-Great king! Is then the fish-bannered 
Kāma invincible even to thee? 
Viveka. -Queen mine! Is there any rejoinder for the twaddle of Mahāmôha, loved by Mithya-drishti? But let us hear the rest as well. 
Messenger.-41. "If one doth fret at Kródha, 
(anger), one cannot be said to be free from anger. If one is angry, how could he be said to have vanquished Krodha? In any case therefore, anger is a ruinous rope with snares at either end. 
Sumati.-My lord! Kródha seemeth to be even more unconquerable than Kama, 
1. False vision. 
2. Tries to refrain from anger. 
202 
for, it is Kródha that is the prime cause for victory over Kama ! 
Viveka.-Love mine! Deprecated not is anger in right time, for, the Truth-perceivers do approve of anger in the matter of subduing Kama etc. 
(Looking at the Messenger). 
Well, messenger! We have heard (from thee) what was intended for our hearing. Inform thy master this from me :- 
42. "The world shall reverence Viveka who hath made Mahāmóha soulless, who hath rejected Kāma and who hath driven Kródha away" 
Messenger.-I shall take leave. 
(Thus saying walks two or three paces). 
43. (Aside) Who in this universe shall be able to conquer Vivêka, assisted as he is, in his mission of doing good to every one, by his wife Sumati, who again is anxious to rouse Jiva from his lethargy ? Still 
203 
my master Mahāmóha doth enjoin on us these errands. 
(Aloud) Great king! Transgress not the adage1 "Abandon the individual to save the family". 
etc; 
(Thus saying exit.) 
Sumati.-Aryaputra! If Jiva, who is ready to attain Móksha, is subdued by Kama, Kródha, Lóbha, Mada, Matsara', etc. incited by Mahàmóha, all thy efforts so far prove futile. 
Viveka. Queen mine! Think not so. But bid 
only for our good. 
1. 
44. Now that the 
the true nature of God divine hath been ascertained by the Upanishads, now that all doubts concerning them have been cleared, and now that Jiva hath the knowledge-(means) 
Do not strive to liberate Jiva, lest the whole family will perish. 
ci. त्यजेदेकं कुलस्यार्थे ग्रामस्यार्थे कुलं त्यजेत् । 
ग्रामं जनपदस्यार्थे आत्मार्थे पृथिवीं त्यजेत् ॥ 
2. Greed. 3. See n 4, p. 61. 4. See n. 5, p. 61. 
204 
to discriminate Bhakti with its entourage, the Jiva shall attain Móksha by a path, so cool, delivered from the thick mire of perplexities, crowding round the sharp thorns of Kāma and Kródha. 
(Behind the curtain) 
(Two Divine Bards) Victory be to 
thy Majesty. 
(First Bard). 
45. Yon expandeth red eve's twilight, 
The lovely red baize stretched for 
dame Night's steps,. 
The Swell overflowing Rāgā's' 
Ocean-shore, 
The pollen-pile of Kadamba-Kāma, The Japa-garland of Sringara's tuft, The blood-rut of Elephant- 
1. See n-1, p. 168. 
2. 
See n-1, p. 25. 
3. 
A kind of flower (China Rose). 
4. Erotic sentiment personified. 
infatuation, 
205 
The red-saffron resplendence of 
dame West's1 bosoms. 
(Second Bard). 
46. Darkness doth pervade the world all, 
Dishevelled hair, as it were, of 
- 
dame Sandhya,2 
Pining at the separation from her 
lord, the Sun, 
Pitch-dark as overflowing Yamuna's 
roaring waves. 
Viveka. (Listening). Queen mine! These two bards, ever speaking what they see, just hint to us that we are on the close of day, when our owl-like opponents make themselves ready to entrap Jíva, in his slumber. 
Ah! charm-faced lady! Behold. 
47. At sunset doth luminosity decline, Darkness deep Prāchi's face doth cover, Wicked Kāma with Vasanta, all universe 
overpowering, 
Plungeth same, my dear! in vices 
1. The direction West, 
3. The direction East. 
manifold. 
2 Twilight. 
206 
Further:- 
48. Yon fawn-eyed damsel's ornament- 
lustre, 
double, 
Happy-lit lamp's luminosity doth 
To perform usual nightly Nirājana,' Do they walk in groups unbroken, 
to adorn seraglio. 
Therefore I shall now perform the evening ablutions and guard Jiva whose mind is now intently fixed on the supreme Brahman. Attended by thy chamber-maids Kshanti, Santi,3 etc, thou shalt enter the mansion of Mangalācharana and await our arrival. 
(Thus saying exit with Sumati). 
Finis Act III named "Mukti-upaya-aramba. (Preparation of the means of Mukti). 
AUM. 
1. Lights waved as an act of adoration. 2. Patience. 
3. Peace. 
4. Place of the practice of good. 
ÔM=(A-U-M) 
SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 
ACT IV 
THEN ENTER KAMA AND VASANTA. 
Kama.Friend Vasanta ! 
1. Sugar-cane so tender for my bow, 
yon flowers for my shafts, 
Bee-swarm humming sweet harp's 
melody for my bow-string, 
Fair sex, timid and weak, for my 
battalion ; all these true. 
With these aids tender, of my own 
will, prosper I-the conquerer 
of the Trident-wearer.1 
Further :- 
2. With missiles and shafts, by thee 
1. Siva. 
granted, 
208 
And with thee for my help ever 
See how Móha great wieldeth, 
unfailing, 
The universe under one umbrella.1 
Vasanta.-What sayest thou? Thou art Kama 
indeed! 
3. Through prescribed and proscribed 
Karmas with their senses performed, Longing for some results, the 
savants awakened, 
To thee of infinite marvel, impute they, Their deeds, saying "Kama did 
them and Manyu' did them". 
4. With Siva and others, thy sportive 
battles thou didst have, 
Thy free diversion-resorts are Deva- 
chief's mansions, 
Thy pleasure-park is this sea-girt 
earth, 
Ah Madana! How to describe thee, the 
splendour's ocean? 
1. The meaning is that the whole world is under 
Môha's Lord paramountcy 
2. Anger. cf. msania agafa 
209 
Kama. - Friend! Just think of thy greatness 
known all the world over. 
For :- 
the whole 
5. Well-known it is that the origin of Sumanas1 is thyself universe delighteth in thee; thou art indeed the foremost of the thrice-two seasons: Jótis2 entirely doth depend on thee: Madhava where Sri' doth dwell, bearing Pankaja, is all thy own and Kama is thy minister. What other better season is there that can match with thee? 
Besides :- 
6. Thou art the Fire named Vasanta ; this Malaya zephyr is thy charioteer: Asóka 
Two meanings in 4 to 7:- 
1. Devas-Flowers. 
2. Sacrifice (afia), and ParaBrahman. 
3. Vishnu, month of Vaisakha. 
4. 
5 
Lakshmi living in the Lotus Tank--Loveliness 
of Lotus Tank." 
Malaya mountain. 
8. S. 14 
210 
and other flowers, thy Hames; bee-swarms,. the array of smoke; nectar-born moon, the feeding fluid; therefore the tree of Virakti' of the Creator, Siva and others, is burnt away by thee, who hast wiped away even the name of Santi.2 
Vasanta. - Great warrior and 
fish-bannered 
Kama ! The greatness of persons like myself is entirely of thy making. 
For:- 
7. The seasons, of whom I am the chief, are the artists granting thee thy diverse weapons. The Moon and the Sun betoken thy time of victory and rest.* 
Kama. Enough of this abundancy of mutual belanding! State business should first be attended to. 
Vasanta. I shall act, my friend! as thou dost bid. Of one bent of mind as we are, the duty of enkindling the sentiment of 
1. 
See n 2. p 166. 2. Peace. 3. Night time. 
4. Day. 
5. चंद्रोदयमारुतकोकिलालापादि ।211 
providing all the ways and means of sexual love in Jiva. now engaged in the practice of Yoga, shall be mine exclusively, and that of thine the wherewithal' to provide suitable objects of love. 
Kama.-Comrade! I shall act up to thy wishes. Jiva, whose meditation of the blessed Lord is but recent, could easily be turned away, by holding up before him the allurements of ephemeral pleasures, accustomed to which he has been all along. Is there not this Brahman (for him, viz,)-the fair-eyed damsels, themselves the end and aim of all ambition, visible indeed to the eye of all Beings, the Devas, the Asuras, the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the Vidyadharas," the Kinnara, the Kimpurushās and the Mānushas-all? 
1. युवत्यादि । 
3. 
Divine bards. 
Celestial musicians 
4 & 5 Mythical beings with human figuras and 
horse-heads. 
6. Human beings. 
212 
Think not that this is improper :- 
8. Why could not the damsels, who minister to the exquisite of pleasures and who are the cause of the procreation of the universe, be called Brahman, in so far as they do possess the Brahman's attributes'? Vasanta. Friend! This, thine opinion, is borne out by chapter and verse in the Upanishads, for quoth. they (Upanishads) that damsels alone are the Brahman. say that Brahman is a male is but a complimentary twaddle. 
9. Youthful maidens' sidelooks bashful 
To 
and lovely, 
And their amorous tricks (or play), 
adorned most in their unadorned 
simplicity, 
Even the best Yogis, captivate, 
Even Eternal Brahman-a hundred- 
rejecting! 
1. The two principal attributes of Brahman are- 
मोक्षप्रदत्वं = Grant of salvation; जगत्कारणत्वं creative 
cause of the Universe. 
2. स्त्रियो हि ब्रह्मोतवा पुमान् । 
213 
Kama.--(With joy) Dear Vasanta! What thou 
sayest is true indeed. 
For :- 
10. This assemblage of celestial nymphs, whose looks make one mistake them for ranks of arrows, shall now, under my commands, go a-dancing and anon capture Jiva, albeit so intent on attaining Peace beyond works (ie. Brahman). 
Vasanta. Flower-shafted friend! So long as the fair sex is under thy dispensation, our mission is as good as fulfilled. 
Now:- 
11. With ears made merry by the honey of melodious music, with eyes carried away by rapturous dance and with heart enslaved by diverse emotions erotic, the mind' of Yogis can never decline from the bevy of blooming damsels. 
Kama. (Pondering and with a sardonic smile) 
1 Resolve not to give up Yoga. 
214 
12. Should, disregarding me, Vivekaprond in the company of Vyavasaya' and others, would yet fight with me, he himself should bring about the fate of Saubhari2, captivated by a hundred damsels. 
Vasanta. No wonder! For, renowned indeed 
are thy valorous deeds! 
13. The merry she cuckoos, (as if they were)-the musical instruments of Panara, Vênu. Vina, etc.-ever sing the valor of thee, blossom-bowed Cupid, that hath the bow-string made up of the swarm of bees, delirious with the drink of honey, flowing from the blossoming Kalpaka blooms that make thy bow! 
i. Application. 
2. 
3. 
A sage named Saubhari, while penancing in the midst of water, beheld a fish, surrounded by its offspring. Enamoured of this, he gave up the penance, himself longing to enjoy a similar happiness and married the hundred daughters of Māndhāta for the purpose. (See Vishnu Purana). A kind of musical instrument. 
4. Flute. 
5. Harp. 
215 
Hence thou needst use not much effort 
to accomplish such a simple task. 
14. Bend not in vain thy bow whose flower-shafts never yet missed their aim; fill not thy bow-string with the lovely flower-arrows. Friend! Even at the mere sight of thy weapons-the flowers-brought by me into existence and laid in reserve by hundreds in thy quiver-the trees' branches, quiver indeed shall Vivêka. 
Kama. - This sort of mild enthusiasm will not 
do in the matter of a mighty foe. 
For: 
15. Doth not the sun rise with a full thousand rays to dispel the darkness which could (though) be dissipated even by a little light? 
16. Set aside the story of fight for have 
not the poets chronicled that indescribable misfortunes have attended persons who allowed themselves to be slighted. even 
Ji 
216 
in a small measure, as in (stories of) gambling' and verbal debates2. 
Vasanta.-How is it that thou, though holding the whole universe under thy grip, underrate thy own greatness and anticipate the slightest slight from any person what- 
soever ? 
A thousand locusts cannot screen the thousand-rayed sun! 
17. So long as thy army is active, with its infantry-the charming beauty of lovely women, its cavalry-their amorous gait, its elephant-division-delirium from draughts of wine, and its chariot-division-sexual enjoyment, who with any regard for Yoga can ever remain alive? 
Now the Jiva hath not yet scaled upto the high pinnacle of Yoga. Such being the case, why for no reason doubtest thou that we shall not achieve our object! 
1. Vide the chronicle of Dharmaputra and Nala. 
Hi 
Sisupala. 
217 
For it is found :- 
18. That the Jiva, aware as he is of the pit-falls of Samsāra, doth still long for the same; though he speaketh of the attainment of Brahman, still he doth hanker after mundane prosperity; though he yearneth for the Ocean of Joy, he doth at the same time shamelessly shrink. Therefore the Yoga of the Jiva in such a dilemma, could with very little effort be frustrated. 
Kama. Thou seemest to hint that the best opportunity to slay the Jiva is this,-while asleep. 
19. Most opportune therefore is this time for me to exhaust all (my) weapons on the Jiva who hath not yet completed his Yoga, -like Arjuna attacking Karna, when the latter felt abashed at seeing his chariot slightly sunk in earth! 
Vasanta. Very well. If thou dost so, thy 
efforts shall sure with success be crowned 
1 Vide Karua parva of Mahabharata 
218 
20. The person, who hath solely set his heart on tumbling into the mire of Yoga, that could not dry by ever so many sins, owing to Virakti's fraudulent ways, shall yet have all his Nirrêda' and conceit shaken out by the blows of thy weapons all and he shall again hanker after diverse delights, to which Rudra, etc, are addict. 
21. 
Breaths there the Yogi with soul so 
dead against desire who longeth not for the pretty prattle of women,-pretty-made by smiles,-halting accents and sensuous feastings, the prattle, serving as it were, for the triumphal flag of our victorious army, what by Malaya wind and the moon-light, what by jasmine and the hum of bees and such composed? 
Kame. Friend! A simpleton surely is Viveka, inasmuchas he trieth to effect for the Jiva, who is such a victim to physical and mental infirmities,-the success of Yoga. But it shall be as futile as crossing by swimming the high seas, as flitting 
1. Detachment. 
219 
across the blue vault of heaven, as drinking at the mirage, and as taking a bath on earth. 
Further :- 
22. Vivêka, intent on liberating the Jíva, and-who is rolling dissipate in revelry and delirious with draughts of sensedelights-knoweth not (it seems) the worth of the amorous sports of celestial courtesans, their charms resembling honey, dripping from nectar-soaked grapes. 
Just mark here the two horns of the dilemma :- 
23. If, through the power of discrimination, a person, in whom the power of aversion fto worldly pleasures) hath just dawned, doth fret at me, how could he possibly be said to have subdued Anger (Krodha)? If (however) on the other hand he casteth away anger, how could he be said to have shunned me (Kāma)? Vain therefore is the twaddle of fools who speak of the subdual of (both) Anger and Desire! 
220 
(Then enter Krôdha dressed in a horrid guise.) 
Krodha-(Approaching in haste). 
Hail my 
friend! Hail, my blossom-bowed Kāma!the vanquisher of Vivêka by movements unhindered! Who is this partisan of Vivêka who prattleth in vain about the subdual of Anger and Desire? 
(Walking round horridly and with a loud laugh). 
24. How is it possible here to speak of Viveka, when I-the Vanguard of several arch-chiefs, dancing on the horrid stage of war-am here, I, whose followers, the Asuras, raise feverish panic in the bosoms of Deva-damsels, whose (Devadamsels') sandal-paste, put on to cool heat, anon drieth up? 
Kama.--Welcome, my good friend Krodha, the foremost among charioteers and ever ferocious towards my enemies! Thou hast come in right time, intent on helping me, when I have been deeply deliberating221 
as to how I should fulfil my master's mission. Thou hast under thy sway the great Mahêsvara and others, who (ever so much may) exercise self-control. Hurrah! Our great king hath conquered! 
Further :- 
25. When vanity hath vanquished, when I (Kāma) have stopped havoc, when Môha hath ceased enthusiasm, when the forest of sin hath burnt away, yet thou, alone of all, fed by the manifold kinds of fuel, say of a particle of contempt, art capable of disrupting Yoga for the Supreme Brahman! 
Vasanta. Surely this meeting of Kāma with thee (Krodha) doth resemble the conjunction of wind with fire! With materials, all so ready, why should we tarry any further? Success surely followeth in the wake of enthusiasm. Methinks success will crown us, if we only adopt the plan (of nocturnal slaughter) advocated by our dear friend. Kāma. 
1. Siva. 
222 
For:- 
26. Let fawn-eyed celestial damsels,with their glances dancing like the bees that form Kāma's sugar-cane bow-string-with lovely breasts bending that make them be mistaken for the ruby-creepers' flower bunches, guarded by Kama's demireps,walk round the Jiva, who is absorbed in 
Virakti. 
Kama.Friend! The best of seasons, Vasanta, remindeth us opportunely of what we should do. With Kródha marching in front, heading the celestial-courtesanbattalions, I shall follow, with the string firmly braced to my bow; and thou shalt follow at my heels, guarding the flanks, with all wistfulness, vigilant all round. 
(All march as described above) 
Vasanta. Oh Kāma and Kródha-the foremost in Mahāmóha's army! Hear my advice. This is the occasion to despoil Yoga that is about to be begun, by nocturnal slaughter. For yon riseth the moon lustrous, 
225 
making the oceans four swell. Behold now in our front the rising moon-beamsharbingers, as it were, of the emerging moon-the lover of the blue-lotus tank and the servant of the moon-faced young damsels, marching in thy front. 
27. Yon moon-beams, as they are, 
milky sea's swell, 
From the whale's mouth, drunk 
and emitted, lovely as dame Night's 
amorous smile, 
Shining as white sandal-paste mixed 
with camphor white, 
Feast the eyes onlooking the East, as 
if drenching them in ambrosia cool. 
Besides :- 
28. Behold you Udaya Mountain's 
splendour, doubled by the rising 
Moon's lustre, 
Seemning, as it were, an elephant with conch-docked ears and with flowing 
ichor color! 
224 
Krodha. -Ah dear destroyer of demon Sambhara1! In troth Vasanta but spake the fact. 
Now:- 
29. The damsel moonlight, shining as the rising Milky Ocean, doth beget in the direction East, the daughter-peerless Loveliness who maketh blue-lotuses blossom. Behold the waxing night when lovely stars do twinkle and when the tress-like Darkness, seemeth, as it were, somewhat dishevelled by the throes of childbirth ! 
Kams. All regard is indeed due to my friend -the Lord of the galaxy of stars, who is armed with weapons, mighty to dispel pitch-darkness and who doth adorn the plaited hair of Siva. 
30. This Moon, the shedder of lovely moonlight, the wishing-gem of the anguish 
1. The allusion is to Kama's incarnation as Aniruddha, Sri Krishna's grandson, when he killed demon Sambhara and married his daughter Usha (vide 10th Skandha of Sri Bhagavata). 
2. The Moon. 
3. Lit: Chintamani. 
225 
1 
of the love-lorn She-Chakravāka, the instructor of Kāma-Sāstra, the mirthmaker of the triple-world, the vouchsafer of delight on the blue-lotus tank, doth dissipate steadily the darkness that hath held possession of all the directions. 
Further:- 
31. You noon-beams, distilled from its rise from Vishnupāda, making the twinkling stars look like piles of foam, rising from the Udaya mountain and resembling celestial Gangā, doth give variegated colors to the Yamuna-like darkness. Friend Kródha! Behold the plenitude of my help! 
32. You Lover of the stars is my loved friend; moon-light is my mate; Vasanta, who equippeth me with flowery weapons in abundance, is my relative esteem-worthy: in the event of danger, thou, O Kródha of irresistible force! art my protector. Who 
1. Rudly-goose. 
(bird) 
Two meanings - Blue vault and Vishnu's feet. 
8. S. 15 
226 
then with any regard for life shall stand before me, armed with my bow of bloons ? 
Krodha.Friend! When fortune favors, what 
all to us shall favorable not be? 
Further :- 
33. How to call a person desireless, wher he doth desire to conquer thee (Kāma)? If he doth not desire to shun thee, he is certainly not devoid of desire, inasmuck as thou desertest him not. 
Kama.-Enough of this procrastination, which 
is but the thief of time. This Jiva whohath entered on Yoga shall now be approached by us. 
(All do accordingly). 
Vasanta. --Behold this Jiva, who hath just embarked on Yoga, by Viveka directed, the latter doing all things opportunely for Jiva who is absorbed in meditation on the twin-feet of the Supreme Lord, renouncing all his attachment for sense-dictates. 
227 
34. The Jiva peruseth the purānas1 which speak about the terrors of hell and yet falleth frequently into sloth: be perceiveth the soul as distinct from the body and at the same time tendeth the body with all care; he longeth deliverance from the ocean of sorrow and yet hankereth after sense-lusts. Pining 
thus, in a double life, he seemeth as if rocking in a swing! 
Kama. Friend Kródha! Vasanta hinteth that Jiva hath not yet attained the stage of profound meditation. Our help-mate Vishaya-rasand, ever (busy) begetting eternal and marvellous effects-a perennial stream-is unassailable even by those who have subdued the enemies-the senses external and internal": 
1. Sacred legendary chronicles, 18 in number. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The implication is that Jiva is alwars in a 
dilemma 
Sense-a3800iation 
Sensuousness. 
5. Kama. Krodha, etc, (Anger. Lust, ste) 
228 
35. Even granting that Jiva transgresseth the ocean of samsara in secrecy (thus) engendering a longing for salvation and that he indulgeth in pleasing parleys with Yógis, even then, the mind, vestured by garments woven by evil propensities manifold, such as egotism, loseth anon its equilibrium. 
Vasanta. Terror of the enemy host thou art (sure)! Beware also of another matter. Even though one hath dissociated from society, self-esteem alone is enough to violate one's Yoga. It is for this self-same reason that Samvarta, Jada-bharata, Vidura and others, rightly understanding the moral of Hiranyagarbha's text', courted public contumely, serving as sin-remover and led a life as if of madmen. Therefore before the Jiva might arrive at this state of contumely-courting, let Kródha seize him swift, using contumely itself as the medium. 
1. संमानना परां हानिं योगः कुरुते यतः । 
जनेनावमतो योगी योगासिद्धिं च विन्दति ॥ 
229. 
36. But now the Jíva is at hearing, instructing, learning, asking, adoring, singing, touching', realisingR and praising", the Lord. Thus perpetually revelling in the enjoyment of the worship of Murāri's feet, it may be that Jíva, seated firmly in his fortress of wisdom, is well nigh unassailable. 
Further :- 
37. The Jíva, who, weaned from vain wants, is happy, and even from law-allowed wants free, spurning them even when they spontaneously approach, and injuring none, liveth thus the life of a boa-constrictor10. 
Kama.-(Smiling and shy) Friend! How is it 
1. The attributes of God. 2. What he heard to others. 3. The lore allied to the subject (of 
Yoga). 4. His doubts 
5. The Lord. 6. His 
through his Acharya. 
Holy names. 7. His 
materials of worship e. Basil etc. . His form 
9. God. 
10. The life of a boa constrictor lies in the fact that 
it only receives its food reaching its mouth of its own accord 
1 
230 
that at war time, thou art as timid as a child. For, thou dost not appear like taking time by the forelock. 
38. Thou, the best of seasons and right worthy to enjoy pleasures infinite, art 
my friend. 
Myself am holding under my grip 
Kāma great, 
mortals and 
immortals and animals, and this is Kródha, cruel by nature and resenting all opposition to me. We three therefore shall jointly now perpetrate nocturnal slaughter as did Ascatthama and others' of old. 
Vasanta. Friend! I am not unmindful of all the pros and cons in this affair but I doubt how we shall be otherwise than unsuccessful when Jiva doth not allow us the slightest loop hole, for, what availeth the waking sentinel after the house has been rifled by la gang of thieves? 
39. To promote Nivritti-Dharma and to refrain from Pravritti-Dharma, the Jiva 
1. Kripacharya and Kritavarma.231 
resorteth to the Universe-Maker, just like an invalid resorting to a physician. 
Krodha. 
With haste). Vasanta and Kāma shall presently know my extraordinary skill in carrying out what I will. 
40. Several are the persons of wondrous valour, ruined by this,-myself, by various expedients, without actually taking hold of (the victims), as in the case of Jamadagni' and others, and actually taking hold of (the victims), as in the case of Rāvana and others. 
Vasanta.-Well known is this, thine exploit ! But where is thy opportunity to seize the 
A sage named Jamadagni, while penancing in his hermitage, was met by Kartavirya, who, not getting the sacred cow, he asked for. flung a snake in the sage's neck and the age, enraged at this, cursed Kārtavirya, even before the sage was killed by him. The implication is that Jamadagni lost his life through Kartavirya, as he (the age) became a victim to anger apparently through a snake and not through Anger (Krodha) seizing him directly. 
232 
Jíva who hath thoroughly renounced the world? 
Krodha..(Shouting Ha! Ha!!). I have opport- 
unities even for such a person. 
41. By just robbing a person though he hath detached his mind thoroughly, of a shattered garment of his, a seat, a Kamandalu,' etc, by contriving to hide such articles, of a sudden, I shall disconcert the Yoga of a person by bringing about uneasiness of mind, false prattles. untrue imputations, mischief, ignorance, etc. 
Further:- 
What wonder is there in unhinging Jiva's concentration of mind, when I could disturb the minds of highly eminent personages such as Mahesvara? 
42. For an Airavata, which weareth the flowery-bunch-like Earth as its crest-jewel 
1. Pot used by an ascetic for keeping water. 2. The Airavata is supposed to bear the Eastern quarter of the Earth on its head and the Earth supported on its head is compared to the wearing of flower bunches. 
233 
carrying of (Indra), the 
with no effort, can the the Lord of the Dêvas overthrowing of the Asura hosts, the shattering of the Kulāchala mountain, and the devastation of forests vast, be a cause of wonder? 
Kama. -Friend Vasanta! Beware that what Krodha sayeth may not prove untrue. 
43. Who dare resist the force of the darkness of Kródha, more powerful than sleep, swoon and death-agony, effacing all established distinctions of castes and ideas of high and low and resembling the dark billows of Yamunā, overflowing its banks, swelled by downpours of coveys of clouds (gathering) at the time of the great cataclysm? 
Further:- 
My glory, proclaimed by sages great, such as Vālmíki, is a thing also not to be lightly passed over. 
44 Was not even Sri Rama the victim of 
234 
my contempt through the influence of my weapon, Sri-Rama-the Lion of the Elephant-like Virādha", the exsiccators of the ocean, through the fire of his shaft, the conqueror of Khara, Dhûshana, and their hosts, the severer of the ten heads of Rāvana and the decimator of Kumbha- 
karna? 
Vasanta.-Kāma ! Well done. 
Kama.--Friend! All praise is thine; for it is through thine influence, all this was done by me. 
1. 
3. 
Indulging in lamentations etc. over the loss of 
his wife Sita. 
A giant slain by Rama in the Dandaka forest, immediately after Sita was taken away by Ravana. 
The allusion is to Rama drying up the ocean by sending forth his arrows, enraged at the presiding deity of Ocean not answering his call promptly. 
4. At Dandaka forest these two giants with their followers of 14000 Rakshasas were slain by Rama all alone. 
235 
Vasanta.Hallo, Fish-bannered Kāma! Even the greatest warriors plunge into grief through thy greatness and become lunatics. 
For :- 
45. A person, whose eyes' are reddened and who is intoxicated with the wine-like wenches, doth bewail, faint, waver, bemoan and discriminateth not good from evil. 
as ye, 
(Musing). Unconquerable Kāma and Kródha are, something still lurketh in my mind. In all business the greater the succour, the more successful are the results. 
(Gesturing as if approaching footsteps were heard). 
46. Yonder cometh Lôbha, attended by his consort Trishna, despatched by Mahamaha, to despoil Jiva's craving for Móksha,-Lôbha, the foremost of the devastators of Dharma, the ruiner of 
Eyes blinded with passion. 
2. Covetousness. 
236 
the efforts of Sama and Dama, the swallower of the ocean of knowledge and the deviser of obstacles to Yogis. 
Kama and Krodha.-(See with delight). 
Vasanta. - Invite here Lôbha, the one coveted 
after, by all minds in the universe. 
Kama and Krodha.Well conceived, 
friend 
Vasanta ! 
Kama.--(Snapping the thumb and fore-finger 
together). 
Krodha.-(Seconds with loud applause) 
(Then enter Lobha and Trishna). 
Lobha.-47. Here in haste approach I-the consort of Trishna, bearing Mahāmôha's commands on my head, that are as it were, a garland (to the head). Who shall bring about contentment to this self of mine, even with the gift of golden Brahmanda worlds, so famous for immensity and for numbers? 
Love mine! 
(Embracing Trishna). 
237 
48. The Maker Himself seemeth, dear Trishnā! to have created thee-of unfailing youth,' rolling together the beauties of all the maidens of the Devas ! 
I shall just demonstrate this :- 
49. Even were thy belly filled with several mountains of gold and silver,s Trishnā! its emaciation increaseth' all the more! 
Trishna. - Small wonder that the beauty of this, thine wife, surpasseth that of every other woman! Yet make for me more necklets, armlets, waistlets and anklets, fitting my beauty, gathering together all gems from the mansions of the Dévas and the Asuras. 
Lobhs.--Love mine! Easy done this, thy request. Vanquished by me are the Devas and the Asuras, the Kinnaras and the Kimpuru- 
r. (Smriti). 
1. of 2 
2. Meru. 
4. 
Aud not the belly. 
3.. Kailasa. 
238 
shas, the Vidyadharas and the Munis', and men and beasts, in that they mutually kill each other and take even a particle of chaff for the golden Méru. Just hear the pitiable plight I subject him who styleth himself as Kubera, the Lord of Riches and the companion of Tryambaka 
50. Spendeth not the King of Kings 
J 
his begotten wealth, 
With his wits all bewildered, nor doth 
he enjoy, 
Yet longeth he for more and more 
wealth, knowing not the joy 
of sleep Yet guardeth he like the devil, the 
greatest of treasures. 
Trishna.-Aryaputra! Now that by thee are the worlds three made greedy 
of wealth which is the second Aim of life, what may be the situation of the person possessed of Viveka ? 
1. Sages. 
2. Siva. 
3. Kubers 
239 
Lobha.-Love mine? What hath yet to be ascertained is this. Here, awaiting my arrival, remain Kama and Kródha-instigated by Mahāmóha-to damp the enthusiast of the Jiva for yoga. We shall just approach them. 
(Approaching). Here is Lóbia, prostrating his elder brothers, Kāma and Kródha 
Trishna.--Here is she prostrating-thy daughter 
in-law, ye elders! 
Kama and Krodha. Long may ye both live! 
Vasanta. --Ha! Your meeting is like the conjunction of heat, wind and wild fire! Successful shall prove king Mahāmóha's enterprise and your wives, Rati. Jighāmsā' and Trishna shall never to widowhood be victims by (any efforts of) Viveka. 
(All embrace each other). 
Kama.-Welcome to Lóbha, the protector of 
wealth-all my world (art thou). 
1. Desire to roanslaughter. 
240 
Lobha. Yes, I am indeed the object of thy 
grace. 
Krodha.-Dost thou conduct carefully 
our 
master's business,-thou who turnest away at the mere mention of Móksha ? 
Lobha-Through thy grace, unfettered are my ways everywhere. Behold now the present unique condition of the world, ardently intent, like Duryodhana, on begetting weath, which is the second End of life. 
51. These kings of the earth, ever so firmly greedy for even a particle of a sod of this mean earthy earth, distract themselves; the lords of the immortals do ever tremble with fear, lest their position be coveted by anyone somewhere performing penance; even the ascetics who have renounced the world are not free from the weakness of censuring a person extolled by another. The whole universe is therefore under the influence of Durmati's maids Asúya' and Irshā.2 
1. Envy. 
2. Malice,241 
52. Persons, seized by the demon of insatiable greed, trot though all the Quarters Ten; make the surface of the earth disturbed; sing the praises of the rich; volunteer menial service to others; cross the high seas with ships and wage vain 
wars. 
Vasanta.-Ah! long live thee, Mahāmóha's prime 
minister! What obstacles shall there be for thee-the promoter of the Second End of life, so liked by all minds alike, owing to its susceptibility (as means) for enjoyment, the End, proclaimed in Arthasistra,' that is so patronised by multitudes of kings, the end that is the Incarnation of wealth itself, so well co-operated by Trishna? 
53. The End of life named Wealth (Artha) patronised by the votaries of Kamasastra" and begotten by means fair or foul, as may the tides of time determine, is entirely of thy making, what of earning. of hoarding and of refusing to the needy! 
1. Science of Wealth, 
Second End of Life) 
91 29 
Love, 
(Third End of Life) 
9. S. 16 
242 
Ye shall heed this my proposal. How shall w we capture a person clothed in the unassailable armour of wisdom viz., Viveka? 
Kama. Friend! It is thus that I have made up my mind:-I shall advance in front; ye three shall, placing Trishnā in the centre, follow me and protect both the flanks and the rear. With such unassailable squadron as we are, the baffling of Viveka's efforts, bent upon ruining his own clan, shall be a fait accompli 
(All range themselves accordingly and walk five or six paces). 
Kama.(Waring his flowery bow fixed with sharts in haste). Behold ye, the target secured for the darts of my bow,-dartsnice and sharp, now braced to the string. 
54. 
Look here how yon person, espousing the way of surrender, realiseth his own self, by singular Yoga-practices, is steady by his senses multitudinous being restrained, breath controlled and weaned (from the worlds), 
243 
treading the way of Nivritti (renunciation). 
Vasanta.-(Looking carefully) 
attention we must now be. 
Heigho! all 
55. Here museth Vivêka over some secret, helped by Sumati, and all secluded, after retrieving the Jiva from the Ocean of Maya', so as to make him reach Paramapada. 
Krodha (Knitting his eyebrows). Ah Vasanta ! Let the wicked Vivêka deliberate what he may. but the Jiva shall never defeat our designs, led (as we are) by Kāma in the 
van. 
56. The self-born Kāma, who eateth up the wealth of faultless Yoga, catcheth witless beings, sporting themselves in the Samsara-sea, boisterous with mighty billows, by his hook of sense-enjoyment, making them thus his condiment. 
1. See n. 6, p. 72. 
2. See n. 4, p. 72. 
3. 
Fish to wit (e soul in Samsara are. like fish. 
caught by lust). 
244 
Behold the quaint meditative mood of the Jiva! 
57. The Yogi, construing knowledge of the True Self as the mansion, blessed attribute-groups-his ornaments, meditation--his sexual enjoyment, secluded habit of austerity-his love-prattle, resorteth to his seraglio of Upanishads, shutting himself off from all the world. Thus doth he enjoy the moods of Love under the pretext of Peace. 
Vasanta.--(Aside). 
Enough of these vain hopes. These are mere castles in the air. 
(Aloud). Friend! In the presence of a mighty foe, of what avail are these bragging words ? 
Lobha. -Friend Vasanta! My wife Trishna hath to be consoled as she is afraid of the enemies' tumult. 
(Looking at Trishnā). Charmed looking Trishna! Fear not the foe, howsoever mighty, so long as thou art in the midst of 
245 
this great warrior-squadron. 
Trishna. So long as thou, esteemed by all the Dêvas and the A suras, art alive, I am ever free from fear. 
Kama.-(Looking round with fear). Now we 
must retrace our steps. 
58. For, Viveka, with his natural strength of unfailing knowledge, with wondrous walk, well equipped with the firm armour of forbearance and contentment, appeareth before us, seated in the chariot of Pranava sent by Brahman, and he disperseth our squadron. 
(All fear). 
59. If one of ye three, 
peradventure, 
meet with danger, surely Mahāmôha whose very life is in the lives of those devoted to him, shall himself put an end to kis life. Instantaneously shall his wife Durmati commit Sat. Therefore retreat from 
1. Army. 
3 
See n. 6, p. 2. 
The Hindu custom of the wife being cremated with her departed husband. 
246 
the presence of Vivêka is at this juncture most advisable. 
Lebba.--Fight we must not here, without our king. He himself will decide what yet 
remaineth to be done. 
Krodha.-(With disgust). 
But so far what have 
we done for our king's business? 
Lobha. Friend! 
60. The march of time, with the high speed of the sun's car revolving fast, can not be impeded by the impact of a gust of wind from the opposite direction. The wise won't shut the door after the horse is stolen. Therefore it is better for us now to think how best we may tide over our future troubles. 
Therefore, in this affair, we must first protect our lives. For, it is said that one must protect oneself by every means in his power. 
Kama.--Our Lôbha, who knoweth the ways of 
the world, giveth us advice most apt. 
247 
61. It is not meet that we, who wanted to adopt the policy of night-slaughter till now, should fall into the great abysmal pit of angry Viveka. Now shall Mahamoha himself strive to defeat our foe in action, himself leading Dambha' with his wife Kuhana and Garva3 with his wife Asûyā1 etc. 
Therefore we shall now disperse in different directions, for, they say that to save oneself he should forego the world. (Thus saying exeunt all). 
Finis Act IV termed KāmādiVyuha-Bhêda (Dispersion of the Squadron of Kama etc.) 
AUM. 
1. Vanity. 
3. Pride. 
2 Fraud. 
4. Envy. 
ÔM-A-U-M) 
SANKALPA-SURYODAYA 
ACT V. 
THEN ENTER DAMBHA AND KUHANA. 
Dambha.-Halloo! Kuhanā! my dutiful wife ! I want thee. For, thou art my co-partner, by none unpolluted, as was Tārā' owned by Brihaspati, and Ahalya owned by Gautama. Thou wouldst not brook even a moment's separation from me. 
1. Tara, the wife of Brihaspati was seduced by 
Chandra, under the pretext of discipleship. 
The 
Drama of Tārā Sasanka is too well known to be 
reproduced here in extenso. 
2. Ahalya, the wife of Gautama was seduced by Indra. The latter, enraged at this seduction, cursed his wife and transformed her to a stone. She continued in this stony state till Sri Rama gave her back her former form by the touch of his feet, on his way to Mithila. 
249 
Kuhana.-Thou, the best of Brahmanas, hast expressed correctly. And yet I blush at the illustrations cited. Thou, my master, shouldst have said: "As Arundhati' owned by Vasishta." Whenever I am courted by thieves, gamblers, village headmen, royal ministers, heretics and such others, I resort to them, taking them, quotha, for thyself! 
Dambha.-(Smiling). Therefore thou art the best of chaste women in all the worlds. My Agnihotra' and other sacred fires, even if interrupted, are kept burning by theemy sacrificial wife, by fires, brought from some place or other, when my Gārhapatya fire is extinguished. 
1. Arundhati, the wife of Vasishta, is reputed to be one of the unquestionably chaste ladies ever known. 
A ceremony performed daily, both morn and eve, wherein the housewife has to look to the unbroken continuance of Fire, all through her life 
3. One of the three kinds of sacred fires pertaining 
to married life. 
250 
My Sthālipāka' ceremony is similarly never interrupted, as thou concealest even thy menstrual course. Similarly again the Vaisvadeva and Pitriyajnya ceremonies are never interrupted. Where then is the occasion for expiation ? 
Kuhana.-Hush! 
Heaven forbid !! There is need for substitution, only when there happeneth interruption to Fire. In our home, interruption to Fire is a thing yet unheard of, for, our ever-pleased Lares et Penātes guard our Fires perpetually. Similarly, concealment of the periodical course shall be necessary, only if that monthly sickness ever appear at all. The same Lares et Penātes delay its happening, should it chance to appear during the parvas. 
Dambha.-Well, Kuhanā! Indeed, thou art 
1. A ceremony done with grain as the chief ingredient before the fire and completed on the full-moon day. 
2. A ceremony done with oblations to fire after 
the daily midday worship. 
3. Ceremonies relating to departed souls. 
4. Full-moon days when Sthālipaka is performed.251 
Much I esteem 
my co-partner in life. thee, as thou dost maintain my Brahmanism, thou-my sacrificial wife-the lawfully wedded wife of a great Srôtriya'. Always thou observest the Dvādasi2 vow, after sumptuously feeding me, who is ever pinched by hunger and thirst, even on Harivasaras days, privately and well thou showest thine vow to others, by ostensibly wandering from door to door under the pretext of gathering materials therefor. I shall now however unfold thee a secret. 
There now exist some Asuras, who have hid goodbye to all Dharmas, putting on the garb of ascetics, maintaining arguments tending to Māyà, seeming, as they 
1. One well-versed in the Vêdas. 
2. 
4. 
4. 
The 12th day of the Lunar and the Solar fortnights when Brahmanas take sumptuous meals early in the morning after a fast on the previous day. That time of Dvadasi during which fast is 
prescribed. 
அகத்திக்கீரை, சண்டக்காய், நெல்லிமுள்ளி ete. 
5. Arguing that all the world is a delusion and an 
unreality. 
252 
are, Kali-yuga itself incarnate. Thou shalt, at no time, leave my presence, seeing that these Asuras desire to entice thee, as Rāvana' and Arjuna once did. None but thou shalt even for a moment serve me, the best of Brahmanas. 
just now, 
Queen Durmati hath, requested me to practise some witchcraft on Vivêka, the desperado, who broodeth over some evil or other (to use) against our king Mahāmôha, the Lord paramount of all pleasures, both mundane and srargic. It is as follows:- 
"Well, boy Dambha! Thou who spoilest all the Dharmas of the universe 
shalt exterminate Viveka". 
Averse as I am ever to desires, out of extreme civility, believing in the sages' dictum-"There is no sin in exorcising 
1. Ravāna carried away Sità in the guise of au 
ascetic from the Panchavati forest. 
2. 
Arjuna carried away Subhadra (sister of Lord 
Krishna) in the guise of an ascetic. 
253 
the six" I have now undertaken the vow to gratify an unknown deity. Fetch me therefore Parijata flowers and fruits, collected by Lokapala's Purohits', after their bathing in the waters of the celestial Gangà. 
Kunana. - Fie ! Fie !! Alas! How witchcraft could be practised against Vivêka, the master of the quintessence of all the Sāstras, well protected by his cabinet ministers Sama, Dama, and others? They say that witchcraft practised in such a case recoileth on, and bringeth evil to, the practiser himself. 
Dambha.-Ab, silly Brahmani! What speakest 
1. अनिदो गरदथैव शस्त्रपाणिर्धनापहः । 
क्षेत्रदारहरचैव षडेते आततायिनः ॥ 
2. Flowers of the Kalpaka tree. 
The guardians of the Directions such as 
Kubera, Varuna, etc. 
Priests The implication is that Dambha's bathmaterials are furnished by personages no less 
exalted than the Lokapalas. 
5. ef. प्रत्यगेनमभिचारस्तृणुते. 
6. 
A Brahmana woman. 
254 
thou, without knowing my greatness? 
1. Well versed I am in the sciences 
twice-seven and four, 
As also in the arts sixteen times four. In time have I completed several 
sacrifices with abundance of gifts, Implanted all over the world are my 
virtue-proclaiming flags. 
Ah, thou co-partner of this most 
virtuous self! 
Let alone the eminence of my 
erudition and good conduct, 
Just think for a while over my 
contentment. 
The 
2. After conquering the whole surface of the earth, Parasurama, in all humility entreated me to accept the same as a present. I, treating the universe no better than a straw, rejected the offer. Lords of the immortals, surprisingly gratified at my glory, desired to give me Searga and Moksha, but rich in serenity, I rejected this offer as well. 
Kuhana.--(Musing). 
Never mind. Is the 
255 
sorcery, that thy distinguished self proposest to practise against Vivêka and in which thou requirest my co-operation, of the type of Syna' or of any other kind? 
Dambha. -Ah! great Srôtriya's lawful wife! 
I just tell thee the secret of secrets, known only to my most dutiful disciples. Tell this not even to thy companions, Trishna and others. The proposed witchcraft is not specially prescribed like Syêna'. 
But:- 
3. All that is ordained as virtuous by the Srutiand Smritis, but when done at my instance, do wholly act as sorcery against Vivêka. 
Kuhana.Well conceived, but who is it that initiated thee in this mystery of injury to others? 
Dambha. Pah, simpleton! To me who knoweth everything, who is the initiator? All who fancy themselves erudite only resort to me and get their doubts cleared. 
1. A particular form of sorcery 
256 
Albeit, I have taken one by the name of Garva, the disdainer of all worthy people, 
and one in the liking of all, who is the propounder of Mahàmôha's cult, as a mere witness in this affair. Awaiting his arrival, I sit with all materials ready on this seat of Kusā grass, spread by the sages seven, in this siddha hermitage, purified nine times over. 
Kuhana.Well done. The success of the enter- 
prise shall equally be fruitful. 
Dambha. (Gesturing omen). My guardian angel Kuhanā! My right eye throbbeth and this surely doth indicate the encounter with a friend-Looking in front). 
Who is yon great soul that descendeth to this mortal world and approacheth towards this hermitage with a form whose burning brilliance blindfoldeth the onlookers ? 
(Then enter Darpa wearing large sandals on the feet, waving his big arms every moment and with a flag-stay on which was 
257 
tied firm a parchment inscribed with an oath). 
Darpa. - Incited by king Mahāmôha to condemn the best men, far and wide, I have wandered, just to discern the differences existing in the different worlds, and I have but now descended from Satyaloka' to this middle world, after thoroughly surveying all the quarters, up to the Chakravāla Mountain. Worshipped by the guardians of the Points of Space headed by Indra, I wear this ruby-garland, a present given to me by the Ocean3, the relative of the Vanquisher of the demons Madhu and Kaitabha, the Ocean, the donor to the Dévas of the great presents, the cow, the wine, the nectar, the Moon, the Pārijāta, the Kaustubha, the Chintamani,-the Ocean, 
The world of the Prajapati. 
1. 
2. Human world. 
The presiding deity of the Ocean is referred to 
here. 
4. The relationship meant here is the Ocean being 
the father-in-law of Vishnu, as Lakshini, his wife was born during the churning of the Ocean. 
8. s. 17 
258 
the patient endurer of all commotions caused by the churning of the Mandara Mountain, and just now, I resort to this land of Bharata. 
4. Me, the world doth fancy, as the thirteenth1 Aditya, the twelfth' Rudra, and the ninth1 Vasu. 
(Musing and laughing sardonically). 
Strange is this world's folly! Those, whom even to think as equals to my servants is ridiculous, fondly fancy themselves to be my equals and betters! 
5. In this world, men, whose minds shine with Vodic knowledge, the grammarians, those from all doubts in the Kalpa-sûtras free, again those toiled hard in the Vedāngas, and others well-versed in astronomy, others again who have mastered the verdict of Nirukti, and those strong in the three" 
1. As a matter of fact there exist only 12 Adityas, 
11 Rudras and 8 Vasûs. 
2. Etymology. 3. Karma,, Devata and Brahma 
Kandas. 
259 
Mimāmsas, and yet others who ever plod in the vast fields of Nyaya,-all have been routed by me. 
(Gazing at the sky). 
Ah, fool! askest thou whence and how I got all this learning? 
(Clapping the hands and laughing). 
6. Who but Providence endowed the swan with the power of distinguishing milk from water? Tell me how long it took Agastya 
stya | to learn, to swallow the ocean deep. 
But mind not this superiority of knowledge, known all over the universe. Even as regards good antecedents and conduct, I am matchless. 
7. For, well known is my race in this world, for having given up the performance of even a single sacrifice, since the time of its first progenitor, for want of a suitable sacrificial priest to preside at the ceremony! Who knoweth my super-eminent, unrestrained penance, which 
260 
the 
beggars all description and which is not understandable by any,-penance, cardinal doctrine of which is that the senses should not be subjected to pain? 
8. Many are my disciples in this world who are known as Atheists and Heretics, quite competent to hide even the great Mêru',-under the very nose of the Devas, -through their artful arguments, striking and hypocritic! Aye, they would make us believe that the whole world is mad, deaf, lame and blind! 
9. If they do not do so, of what good are their arguments based on experience but which would not shut the mouths of the opponents? The whole universe I shall bring under my sway, bymeans of diverse frauds,-Mani, Mantra, Medicine! 
(What sayeth another?) "Sayest thou that when arguments based on Praminas are firmly established, why 
1. प्रपश्चापलापिनः, महामायाविनः 
2. मणिमन्त्रौषध्यः261 
adopt the ways' of the villain?" 
(Frowning and hissing). Thou meanest of Brahmanas behold! Do the believers in Pramānas decline to believe in the black color of the sky which is borne out by Observation? 
10. Enough of the Six2 schools of Philosophy, founded by the ancient Kānāda and others,-schools which are authorities only to those who believe in them ! What fixity is there when these schools, conflicting with each other, deny the main doctrine that God is only one? Let therefore the followers of my creed, perpetuate my doctrines, ratiocinatively and easily arrived at, and with but two or three determinate steps of reasoning, holding its own irrefutably. 
(Looking to the South). Are not yon kingdoms those of Magadha. Kalinga, 
1. Denying the reality of the world. 
2. Kanada, (2) Akshapada. (3) Vyasa. (4) Kapila, 
(5) Patanjali, (6) Jaimini. 
262 
Andhra, Dravida, Karnāta, Chôla, Konkana and others? 
Alas ! 
11. Sitting at ease at the foot of the Asvattha' tree, I have formulated two scores and eight kinds of Buddhism, in several coarse dialects, and I have overcome the pedantic pride of the followers of the Vedas. 
Thenceforth our renowned disciples move (unshackled) all over the world, leaving their enemies with their bare names and implanting their triumphant banners in all the Islands Seven. 
12. The monistic doctrine, I have given to some; to some others" I have given the dualistic doctrine, and yet to others I have 
1. Banyan (i.e., after becoming a Jina.) 
2. (1) Mabarashtra, (2) Magadha, (3) Saurasenî. 
(4) Apabhramsa, (5) Paisacha, etc., 
3. Depriving them of everything else. 
4. The Illusionists. 
5. 
Tārkikas. 
6. Bhaskara, etc., 
263 
given the untenable mono-dualistic doctrine. Methinks that soon I shall taste the pleasure of beholding the war (of words) as between two fighting goats,-war, caused by the vain zeal of the respective votaries for their chains of arguments. 
(Viewing round). 
These ar 
are regions, bordering on the seas, overrun by the Musalmans and the Greeks. 
13. A certain Brahmana,' laying wager in the gambling of the war of words, argued his theory but was soon defeated by his enemy and, thus deprived of his pride, he was made by me to abandon his adherence to Vedic ways. He readeth to- 
1. One named Mandanamisra was defeated in a disputation by Sankara, the disciple of Bhattacharya, and true to his wager, the former embraced the faith of the latter and compiled a work named Surésvara Vartika Message from the Lord of the Immortals". The cardinal points in his theory are that Vijnana alone is real and everything else is unreal and that Charvaka faith alone is true and that the Vedas are false. 
264 
gether the mutually conflicting doctrines of Jina, Buddha, Brihaspati, etc, with deadly differences among themselves and tantaliseth credulous minds (not versed in Sāstras). 
These countries, infested by barbarians, who are no better than goats, beasts and birds, deserve not even a look from me. In these countries those who do not know even the alphabet carry big books under their arm-pits, and with heavy eyebrows put on the airs of erudite persons. Ah! deceived I am by my sight, directed to a distance ! 
14. Enough of beholding these who prattle all manner of nonsense, conceited with their little knowledge, disregarding their own hierarchy of preceptors, ignorant of either Svarga or Moksha, fancying themselves as erudite, (their only virtue being the frequent dance' of their fingers) and 
1. The implication is that the erudition of these men lies only in their frequent movement of their fingers, thus posing as if they were learned men. 
4 
265 
acting as ministers to foolish kings. 
(Looking to the North). Yonder some one cometh, facing the South, either from Kasmira, or Jalandhara. I shall just ascertain from him how my wives fare? Ah! good Brahmana! "Knowest thou the present plight of my wives Irshà, and Asûyā, who have set out to go round the Mêru mountain, under the leading of Durmati ?" 
(Then listening). 
"What! Savest thou that they are imprisoned in the depths of Nivritti Dharma, by Sumati's deceitful companions Maitri', Karuna, Mudità," and Upêkshā'" ? (With anger). Ah, this devil of a sinful Brahmana speaketh untruth. Ah thou mischievous bastard Srôtriga! Thou Brahma-Rakshasa! 
How could this mishap befall my 
Friendship towards the virtuous. Pity towards the miserable. 
3. Joy towards the "happy. 
Indifference towards the sinners. 
266 
chaste wives, who, though enticing all the world, never for a moment lack in their sole devotion for me! (Musing). Already known to me is this wandering wayfarer, used as a messenger to different climes by the hunting chiefs of the mountainous tribes. 
(Mocking). Alas! Several are the vices converging in one centre, through singularities of places and times! 
15. For, his mother-in-law followeth Digambara's doctrine; Sangatas2 are his relatives; his mother and father are the votaries of Pasupati ;3 Vibhàshika' is his teacher; his wife stands by Sankhya-yoga; Chārvāka's disciple is his friend: himself, known as Mithyachāra, fonleth the Vedas. 
Therefore this hunter's spy, Mithyachara, ever habituated to utter lies, is unfit to 
1. See n. 1, p. 141. 2. Buddhists, such as Sautrāntika, Yogachara who hold that the whole external world is unreal, and as the Mayavadins also believe similarly, the appropriateness of the relationship is evident. 3. See n. 2, p. 144. 4. See n. 1, p. 137. 5. Follower of false practices. 
267 
be conversed with by high souls like myself; to wipe off the sin of having seen him, I shall just see the sun or myself. (Walking quickly). Alas! Are not yon countries in the midland regions between the great rivers the Ganga and the Yamunà? Who is here, though gifted with boons by Brahma and Siva, that will understand my doctrine, full of diverse theories which would baffle even those who profess the knowledge of Brihaspati? Much less he who could controvert, criticise or support my doctrine! These great cities are topsyturvied by the barbarian kings of the West, invited by our sovereign Mahàmôha to shut off the doors to Móksha. Here moveth about some Dāmbhika-Chakravarti?! 
16. These, though they will never go abegging and will scorn even voluntary 
1. The idea is that the sanctity of his own self is 
no less efficacious to eradicate sin than the 
sanctity of the sun. 
The first in rank amongst the (Dambhikas) proud 
men. 
1. 
268 
gifts, always regulate their amorous' gait to the dance of the Actress-Greed. They behave, as if, of their own accord, they uphold the Dharma called Nivritti, their eyes betokening all love for the emotion of Peace and they are saluted by virtuous 
men. 
Alas! What shall I say about this unrestricted sway of Kali, or of the ripe fruition of the penance of Mahāmóha P 
17. This universe, drained of all its wealth, is duped by audacions cheats, who revel at night-time secretly in lecherous lust, which is augmented by the drink of wine at the special Sautrumani sacrifice of amorous sexual enjoyment with harlots, but who, at break of day, put on diverse deceptive appearances. 
Yonder loom rows of villages of conservative Brahmanas, who have not fully severed their connection with the 
Walk of a lover under some pretext or other. 2. A sacrifice in which wine is prescribed to be 
drunk. 
269 
country of the Mlechās (barbarians) and who, to all appearance, pose themselves as the defenders of the Varnāsramas. 
In these villages:- 
18. The Samskaras are mere merrymaking festivities; Sandhya is performed only for diversion's sake; Savitri is ever interrupted by gossip; voiding of excrement is a mere show; thus is this universe topsy-turvied by the force of this Kali age, which acteth in harmony with king Môha and which setteth forth the doctrine of the Alepakas. 
Oh, strange also is this course of Dharma practised here! 
6 
19. Ever the young couples of this 
1. Upanayana (The ceremony of wearing the holy 
thread), Vivaha (marriage) etc. 
Consist only in singing, dancing, and adorn ing 
houses, sans all Vedic rights. 
Religious ablutions performed thrice a day. 
4. Gayatri performed during Sandhya ceremony 5. सांख्यानाम्, अद्वैतिनां चार्वाकाणां वा सर्वधर्मस्वरूप त्यागात् । 6. पुत्रजनयोग्यवयोविशेषः 
270 
village, with hairs black', perform the Agnihotra sacrifice of sexual intercourse that could be performed only by wedded couples,-sacrifice that is inaugurated by Cupid and in which the woman fancieth the man and the man fancieth the woman as their mutual deity.. 
Further:- 
20. All these wander from street to street and thrive by usury, full of deceitful words. They never examine the (capacity of their) students, but merely make them chant the Vêdas like parrots, themselves not knowing the meaning and thrive in mere 
appearances. 
(Looking in another direction). 
These, looking like liberated men, painted in a picture, observe the vow of silence, sitting in the corner of a dilapidated convent. (Discerning carefully). Ha, Ha! They feign the performance of 
1. ef. Sruti: जातपुत्रः कृष्णकेशोऽमीनादधीते ॥ 2. See n. 2. p. 249.2 
271 
Pranayama, seeming, as if they have ceased living, holding their noses by their right hands, the fingers of which are fully covered with long Kusa grass. 
(Clapping the hands). 
21. Ye great men follow the vow of silence through sheer want of ability to talk; ye esteem each other, as no body else care for ye; ye resort to alms, having no other go and ye follow the celibacy of a horse in harness, for a long time. 
(Flinging the hands with contempt). 
22. Enough of these wicked men, maddened with no small pride, unrestrained in (the matter of) the Demon of Conceit,- 
The act of restraining the breath with the utter- 
ance of Gāyatri. 
A horse ever tied and used could not enjoy its mate and so becomes a perpetual celibate for all practical purposes, though not of its own accord, but out of necessity. The insinuation here is that the particular persons referred to are celibates from necessity and not of free will. 
272 
men, not proficient in the war of words, not conversant in the course of logic,men prone to all manner of vows not authorised,-men not rid of the influence of vanity, and not known for high talents! 
(Casting the look in another direction). 
These are men who cover their whole chest with the holy-thread, not containable in a fist-hold, who hold the japa-garlands in their hands, and who frequently touch their hands. eyes, legs, etc, chanting hymns as they do so. They stretch their clothes, antelope's skin, Kusa grass, etc. as seats and sit on them near the high ways resorted to by caravans of way-farers. going on holy pilgrimages, Alas! Look at these great Yogis' strange aversion to desire; they cannot but laugh themselves in their own sleeves! 
For:- 
23. Planting before them very long holystaffs, which are decked with no small bundles of Kusa grass, and which remind 
273 
one of Dambha's flag, yon hypocritical ascetics, preceptors but in name. condescend not even to look at those folk who deposit money-presents at their feet. bent in all devotion. 
Hallo! Pretending as if in incessant and intense devotion, these look not at ven the deity installed before them! Though looking with half-ope eyes at the teacher, parents, etc, who approach them, they affect, as if they do not see them; why speak then of their prostrating etc? 
24. The Dambhikas', really proud by their mindand sense-control, of their fonduet, meditation and absence of greed, After all, fail to approach even by a millionth part the pride of those Dambhikas', who feign to pose as men, bereft of all pride. 
Here is another the foremost amongst the pious, practising penances in the 
j. Vain men. 
9. 8. 18 
1. 
274 
manner of the cat' and of the crane, 
25. This vainest of the vain, with a body, kept steady by long practice and with hands stretched aloft, as if proclaiming his own devotion to penance, standeth himself on his single foor on earth, spread over with Kusa-grass, like a live-figure painted in a picture. 
Here is a strange kind of Sacrificer :26. Performing frequent prostrations, with holy fragrant-earth smeared all over the forehead, chin, nose, knees, arme, belly. etc, there is another, kindling his sacrificial fire, as if coveting the Golden Mountain (itself) and looketh with his half-close eyes Dambha personified! 
(Turning round and gazing). 
Indeed! Strange is the greedlessness 
The cat stands in the posture of attention in a corner and seizes all of a sudden an approach- 
ing prey. 
The crane brst creates confidence by show of indifference bat seizes upon the prey approach. 
ing. 
276 
of the Sanyasins of this Kali age whose only boast is their colored' robe and holy staff." 
27. For alms, for wherewithal to 
For robes, for funds to convents 
maintain disciples, 
permanent endow, 
For equipping library, saying thus. 
Do Sanyasins even, ever cherish 
lust of lucre. 
(With delight) 
Surely as long as this 
mortal world is 
stamp, 
Mahā- 
beset by men of this 
moha's mission cannot but prove a success. Still, con place between the confluence of the White" and the Black' rivers seemeth somewhat to be the resort of wisdom". 
For :- 
28. In one portion (of this hermitage) there is a mound of mrittikà, 
resembling sand-heaps of the ocean of achāra; in 
1. काषाय. 
2. दण्ड. 
3. Gangā, 4. Yamuna, 
5. Viveka. 
6 
Earth used for washing. 
7. Ceremonial practices 
276 
another place there are blades of Kusagrass, as sharp as weapons collected to root away sins; yet in another place appear gathered, flowers, tendrils and fruits, the relics of worship. Methinks, this is the holy hermitage of some true yôgi! 
29. Having traversed beyond, the mire of knowledge opposed to (the teachings of the Vêdas), the wilderness of the Vindhya-like sense-dictates, the mirage of Trivarga' and the net of Triguna' by various austerities, here is some one, shining almost like a Mukta3. He is either the offspring or the elder brother, or may be the father, of the Sun.- 
I shall just approach him. 
(Thus saying enters the hermitage). 
(Gesturing a good omen) (With joy). Surely this throbbing of my right eye 
1. See n. 1, p. 115. 
2. 
Prakriti. 
3. Absolved person. 
277 
indicateth that my meeting with my sweetheart is close at hand. 
(Then enters Asûyê, disguised as an ascetic). Asuya. I am now commanded by Durmati, the queen of Mahāmôha, the foremost of Vivêka's foes, to corrupt the minds of the wise, so masquerading as would strike confidence into the minds of the whole universe. All the worlds ten and four I have wandered and after bathing in the holy waters of the Prayaga, I am just approaching the hermitage of this venerable ancestor named Dharinadhvaja. Clever espionage I should practise so as to make even good appear evil. 
(Praising her own skill). 
30. Vigilant that I am. even Isvara, the extirpator of the sins of the universe, could not afford to remain exempt from blemish. 
Unrestrainedly, the persons obsessed by me ever impuse faults even in cases where they exist not in the least. What to say 
L 
1. 
278 
in cases where faults exist? 
31. Of even the stainless Sri Rama-the paragon of all virtues, this world which by its sharp-edged sword-like tongue driveth discrimination away, speaketh ill in the presence of the virtuous, for his 
laughter of Tātakā', for his unfairness towards Vālin2 and for his slight step-back in battle. Shall it then neglect ordinary 
The killing of a woman is not sanctioned by the Hindu Sastras. Tataka being a giantess, her slaughter was instigated by Visvamitra as she caused great havoc to the sacrifices of great sages. 
2. Unfairness is attributed as Rama laid himself in 
ambush to kill Valin instead of striking him direct face to face. The controversy between Sri Rama and Valin hereon is dwelt at length in the Kishkindha Kanda of Sri Ramayana. 
3. Sri Rama had to face the tremendous odds of Khara's hosts of 14,000 men in Janasthāua and in the heat of the raging battle, he, ever known not to flinch even a step in all his valiant fights, had to retrace by a single step, overwhelmed by the might of the opposed forces(vide Aranyakanda of Sri Ramayana). 
279 
mortals of limited virtue and in whom fault is plain? 
Who are yon sages who have spread their Yoga seats under the Kadamba trees, on the regions close by the Ganga, whose bodies are erect and steady owing to the Paryanka'-posture? Some of them are clean-shaven, others are full of matted hairs, and yet others have plaited tufts. 
(Eyeing attentively). 
Alas! Noted are these people! 
(Smiling). 
32. Communing with that Brahman (woman) and bowed down, with burdening bosoms, with frames held in thrilling sensations, these votaries of Kansastra, under thorough control of their sense-group, too well known, and having bid goodbye to all Dharmas, they pose themselves as Muktas. 
are 
kind of assumed posture when performing Yoga. 
280 
I shall just mention their names :- 
33. These are Sraddhayaji, ShadrasaBrahmavadin, Kāmaikinti, Kakani-nishka dùsa. Some are the disciples of Mārjāra, others of Kukkuta. and still others of Baka. Firm votaries these are of the Charvaka faith! 
May these self-servers prosper! For it is evident that:- 
34. These beggars, to make their good with drinking vessel, wistfully eye 
every moment at the fresh and tender 
1. He who performs sacrifice to create love for 
himself from others. 
He who construes the six beastly emotiona 
themselves to be the Brahman. 
3. He who is over head and ears in lust 
4 
He who takes a cowry for a Pagoda. 
5. He who seizes on an object like a cat. 
6. 
He who commits rape like a cock. 
7. He who robs others of their belongings by 
make-beliefs like the crane.281 
shoots of the Banyan tree that Lord Vishnu' Himself desireth to repose under,-the tree under which the Great Dancer2 seeketh himself rest. 
(Lending the ear towards the air). 
What say ye, beggars !"? Say ye that for me, an ascetic, to scorn (others) is inconsistent? If so, ye yourselves stand self-condemned. For, ye are supposed to be ascetics and yet scorn me ! 
(Turning in another direction). 
Youder approacheth another, wearing golden pendants and bearing staff and jar, thick girdle of Kusa-grass tied firmly round his waist and a belly puffed with sumptuons Ashtaka-srāddha dinners. He 
At the end of the great Deluge, after annihilating the great Kosmos. Vishnu is believed to float on a banyan leaf. 
2. Rudra is believed to take rest under the banyan 
tree after his dance. 
This is an annual ceremony performed in the month of March in which the Brahmanas are sumptuously fed for the benefit of the departed souls. 
282 
trieth to enter this hermitage, inaccessible even to immortals, forcing people in front, muttering threats by shouts of frequent hums, casting his looks here and there and counting the triple worlds for naught but straw! I shall just prevent his ingress by interposing at the gate of the hermitage and find out who he really is. 
Darpa. Approaching and gesturing respect). Ah, divine lady! Thy greatness is well known in the story' of the Mahabharata; thou seemest to be the presiding deity of the ascetic order. Thy success in Yoga is unquestionable. Thou seeniest to be quie affable. I therefore wish to know particularly thine residence, lineage, race, etc. 
Asuya.--Charming man! Thou askest me somnething unfit to be told by those belonging to the ascetic order. Without prostrating To me, how is it that thou standest like a sacrificial post? 
1. ef. क्रकचैः कृत्तदेहोऽपि दीपितोऽपि दनाभिना । 
सूच्यनं न प्रदास्यामि विना युद्धेन केशन 
283 
Darpa. By age, act, erudition, etc, superior I am, but by thy holy order, superior thou art. So I was in a dilemma as to who should prostrate whom in such a case. 
Asuya. If so, in this hermitage, there is the allDharma-knowing sage. Through him, we shall have our conflict of duties cleared. 
Darpa.--I shall try to accommodate thy wish in the matter, but let that alone for a while. I have something else in my mind. 
35. By thy conduct, look, thought and action. I fancy thee, as being acquainted with me before, but thou seemest strangely disguised! 
Asuya. I also fancy thee as having been seen 
by me before. But never mind this controversy now. I wish to prescribe some expiatory rite for thee, who simply wearest white clothes and standest like a lamppost, without prostrating to my noble self, whose feet is worshipped frequently at every ceremony, by even the foremost of ascetics, who take me for their superior 
284 
in àchāra. I will thus make thee holy. 
Darpa.-(Aside). This votary of the ascetic order 
prattleth some nonsense. 
Be it so. We 
(Aloud). (With hesitancy). Be it so. 
shall then ask the master of this hermitage. 
(Thus saying, both advance). 
Dambha.--(On seeing both, jeigns to be under a vow of silence, and orders his wife by gestures.) 
Kuhana.-(Advancing in haste). 
Ah, divine Sanyasini! Stand ye must, at a distance from the presence of the master of my house. For, it is not proper for my master to remain near ye, who have not taken your bath and who are polluted by long travel. Let not your shadow which would vitiate the efficacy of Mantras, defile the holy person of this great Yogi. Him, even the high-souled sages, prostrate at a distance. The water of the Bhagirathi, 
1. Ascetic woman. 
285 
brought even by these (sages), my master deigneth not to touch by his hand. 
Darpa. Great is this observance of ceremony by ye, a strange couple! At the confluence of the Gangā and the Yamuna, we have bathed and have sprinkled on our heads, over and over again, water sanctified by the most virtuous Mantras. Could ye possibly be even the shadow of our likeness, having forms, self-luminious and splendrously bright as the Sun ? "Drop into perdition" is all that you deserve. Alas! This, thy husband, a disgrace to his order, surely betrayeth his ignorance under the pretext of silence, by disregarding me, the greatest of the great, and esteemworthy for all the universe and this guest of an ascetic woman who have resorted to thee, to clear the doubt: who should prostrate whom ". 
Dambba. (Knitting his brows and making Hum- 
kāra1.) 
C1. A sound of Hum. 
286 
Kubana.(Approaching in haste and shutting 
his mouth 
mouth with her hand). Highly illustrious Dharmadhraja! Breaking thy VOW of silence, by an appropriate act', thou shalt give a fit reply to these two worthy guests. 
Dambba.-(Gesturing Pranayama and uttering 
Pranava aloud.) 
1. 
(Aside) Unexpected is this conversation with one unfit to be conversed with. 
(Aloud). Ah, thou vilest of Brahmanas and foremost of fools! Sayest thou that it is I that exhibit ignorance? Luckily thou wast not cursed by me so far, lest my penance would suffer. Many are the persons that I have cursed and reduced to ashes! 
Al. miscreant, strange and unheard-of hitherto-fore! Get thee gone. Let not thee be burnt to ashes by the flame of my eyes. 
When the row of silence is abandoned, the 
Pranava is recited. 
2. Restraint of the breath. 
3. See n. 6, p. 2 
287 
Darpa. (With anger). 
Thou fool! Out of 
respect for caste that thou art also a Brahmann, thou wast not so far beaten on thy head. 
Further :- 
36. My country is Tundira; even king Skanda's esteem my ancestor did 
merit, 
Earth's ornament Satyavrata is my Kshetra'; little Kānchi is my 
Through disciples numberless, 
residence, 
quarters ten well I am known, 
Tong old man! Stolid! Thon tortoise in the well! heardest or knowest, thon me as the greatest of disputar ts? 
(Touckling). Alas! Thou vainest of the vain! Thou stranger to my āchāra! Tellest thou that I am a miscreant? Perhaps who but I shall know my greatness? Even the Yogis great merit not a sixteenth 
1. Native village. 
2. 
Vide n. 7. p. 275. 
288 
part of my antecedents and āchāra. Paltry men then deserve no special mention. Therefore it is that I prostrate not even to the Brahmanas, elder even by three years. Knowest thou not my deep desire 10 advance righteousness? 
37. Just because my mother exchange a word with some one connected with an old haga mere suspect of a street scandal, I disowned her (mother), otherwise so chaste, so good! As for me, by virtue of learning, high connection and character, 1 excel even the founder of my family. Who then is match to me, not to say superior? 
Dambha.-Ah, thou immodest and ambitions 
Brahmana! If thou art really one, strictly following good āchāra, how is it thou didst not prostrate to this She-ascetic? Why again thou didst not salute me.-revered as I am like a father by all the world, and possessing a fame, unknown even to omniscient and high-souled men,-me, a Srotriya, 
1. छन्दोऽधीत इति श्रोत्रियः 
1 
289 
elder to thee by three years, as also this lawful and all-chaste wife of mine. bowed to, by even Prajapati and others, - who know the tenth about God and Soul, at the crowning act of all ceremonies ? 
Darpa. Ah, Dharmadhvaja! Sinning selfHatterer! As thou transgressed the rules of veneration, thou shalt be born in 4 low womb. may be, a dog's womb or Panchama's womb. Never have I in all my rambles all over the world come across anywhere one, who esteemeth thee yet. 
(With a loud laugh). Thou foolish cheat! 38. Several are the Prajapatiss, Pasupatis, and Brihaspatis I have seen! In no way thou art their superior, Boing so, thon alone payest me no respect. 
A Brahmana should prostrate to another, elder by 
3 years. 
The impuestion is that even Brahms performs ceromonies with mingled foolings of frend 
Kabana, wife of Dambhal and piety 
Brahmās 1. Radre5. Deva P.ee plots. 
9. S. 19 
290 
Surely, for scorning thy betters, thou shalt anon fall into perdition. 
Kuhana. Ah, thou she-ascetie! This vile Brahmana shall rue for his contempt of this great sage. 
Asuya.---Ah, thou dutiful housewife! How is it that thou, like a wicked Brahmani, reproachest a guest? Tarry we must for a while, when these high-souls indulge in mutual scorn. 
Dambha.--(With anger). Ah, thou crow of a chatter-box! Like a dog, to vainly wander is thy nature. 
For:- 
39. Some there are addicted to all manner of vices, wandering like thee, vainly in this world and claiming shelter under the strength of their mere racial superiority. They are avoided by the virtuous; they get angry and they invoke without any sense of shame disgrace on the onlooker.291 
Darpa. (Clapping his hands and mocking) Why so frownest thou on me, like & monkey, when I but speak facts as they are ? Dambha.-Ab, thou vain fellow, as massive as a pillar! Surely thou knowest not the episode known to all the universe. 
40. Once when on the confines of Satyalôka' I loitered, the Lotus-born Brahmā received me, all of a sudden, with the sages headed by Sanaka," and with his hands washed seven times over, himself gave me Arghya, all humble and lowly! 
41. How many in this world are the sages ancient, who, claiming their descent from the Lotus-born Brahtoa himself, win across the darkest of sins, purified, indeed by the water, washed of my feet? 
Kohana.-So it is! An eye-witness I was 
as well, thy dutiful wife. 
World of the Demiurge 
2. A divine aage. 
Water offered to wash the bands to ☐ guest during reception. 
292 
Darpa.-(Aside). Surely this is my esteemed 
elder Dambha, and that, Kuhanā. 
For, others are not forsooth capable of either conduct or loquacity of this description. I shall therefore treat them as my relatives. 
(Aloud). Ab, all-knowing divine lady! Imagination leadeth me to conjecture something and I shall presently acquaint thee of this. 
42. This venerable lady is no other than the pervert Kuhanā, ever skilled in depriving others of their riches and this is no other than Dambha himself who hath the whole universe under his control and whose sacrifices consist in nothing better than the slaughter of goats. 
How then shall we have our conflict 
of duties solved by him? 
Asuya. That is exactly the thought in my mind. 
Dambha. (Smiling). Your indentity also I 
can determine by reasoning out. 
293 
45. Surely thou art none other than Darpa, ever casting slander on good men and strong only in garrulity; and this, in ascetic guise, is no other than thy wife Asûyā.- 
(Behind the curtain). 
Thou, master of the house, the most virtuous of the Gauda country and thou guest, the most virtuous of the Lāta country, surely but spake truth! 
(All gaze at each other, discover their mutual identity and express delight). 
Dambha. (With joy). Friend Darpa! Our identity is now disclosed through this heavenly voice. 
Darpa. Never did a heavenly voice prove untrue. I owe many apologies to thee, my elder. 
Dambba. Indeed I too have offended thee. 
(Dambha and Darpa lift their hands in salutation and speak affectionate words) 
294 
(Asûya and Kuhanà embrace each other tightly). 
Dambha & Darpa.-As we wished, so have we met here, by chance. Now we should be with our king in time. 
(Then enter Mahàmôha and Durmati). 
Mabamoha.(Musing). My love! 
We, having taken the vow to exterminate the most reckless ruiner of our clan, Vivêka, have just heard that Kāma Krodha and others, sent by us to spoil Jiva's Yoga, have retreated, with their squadron, all broken up like a dam made of sand, seized with an unexpected panic, protecting each other, on the analogy of the maxim of the Lion and the Forest,' and that they, ashamed to behold our face, 
1. सिंहवनगुप्तिन्याय: - The lion cannot exist without the forest, for hunters will bave easy access and will make short work of the lion; similarly the forest cannot exist without the lion, for, then, the forest in the absence of the lion will be transformed into cultivable land. 
295 
have fled in different directions, with intent to commit suicide. Therefore thou shalt hasten their sweathearts Rati,' Jigbāmsā2 and Trishnā3 to their presence to console them, our ministers. 
Durmati.-Aryaputra! Already on that errand have they been despatched to their presence. 
Mahamoba.-Well, 
my love! Thou hast 
rightly divined thy lord's wishes. 
We 
-hall recall them to service at the outbreak of hostilities, after they recover, heart for a while. 
Durmati. Verily so! 
Mahamoha.(With deep grief). 
My love! With my glory everywhere undiminished, I blush (at the thought) that this quarrel should have arisen in respect of this sile Vivéka, my unequal in every respect. As peerless as thou art amongst the weaker sex, I am so amongst the stronger sex. 
1. Goddess of Love. 
2 Desire to kill. 
3 Thirst for wealth. 
296 
For:- 
44. Ever on their heads the Deva and 
the Asura hosts wear', 
The parchment of my order, whose 
text is engraven, 
With ink made of their coronets' 
Their diadems reflecting the 
lustre, 
alphabets across their heads. 
Further :- 
45. Deva-hosts I control : more so 
Trimurtis-Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra. 
mortal kings,. 
J 
confined I in Lotus, Sea and Mountain, Unfailing my brow-force in the 
universe-making, unmaking and 
transforming- 
1. The implication is that the Devas and the Asuras the servants at the beck and call of 
Mabamoba. 
2. A popular belief is that imperceptible alphabets are written on the head of every person which indicate the longevity of a 'person's life, fortune. position, rank, etc. 
297 
Whose grip then am I in, and who 
my grasp could escape? this is an 
open truth! 
(Aside). How then to revenge myself on Viveka.on whom fortune now smileth for some reason unknown? Never mind. Am I not the Great Moha? 
Aloud). Love mine! In any case, like the sun screened by the clouds. diverse religious, sown broadcast by ine in all quarters are somewhat mystified by a few Fools, the Upanishad-followers. Kāma and. 
others, ashamed at the failure of their plot, prefer incognito now. I eat yet topsyturgy the prima facie argument as the conclusion and vice versa, creating difference in objects where it existeth not and sameness where it also existeth not and thus confuse this world; or. I shall strengthen the credible doctrine, so muci. in harmony with Ahankāra" etc. arms pivoting round the cardinal doctrine of 
1. See n. 2, p. 61. 
298 
Experience, the doctrine, where the vain endeavour to establish an invisible Entity, is fully saved and where the end and aim of life are Artha and Kama,-all by the sublimity of my arguments-and thus damp the vain enthusiasm of stupid Viveka. 
Hah! Hah!! 
46. Earth, Water, Fire and Air, are the 
elements; the admixture of these bringeth about knowledge on the analogy' of Intoxication. Who is it that hath seen a soul over and above this, and what happiness can there remain, the moment the body becometh extinct? This is the Charvaka doctrine, founded by Brihaspati! 
The Upanishads quoth that the faith acceptable to the largest number is the stronger faith. It is said that this is the Asura's Upanishat. 
Therefore the 
1. Intoxicatian is brought about by taking in an 
admixture of f (A drug or seed used to 
cause fermentation in the manufacture of 
spirits). 
299 
conclusion of the followers of Vedanta Siddhānta, that the Upanishads are the only real authorities, indirectly acteth as the document admitting our victory, written by our enemy in his own handwriting. 
47. The heretics of our creed', with an aching heart, reconcile their theory, through Experience, which is contrary to their accredited faith; but the followers of our creed, taught in the school of Brihaspati, can act up to the dictates of their mind. Darmati. Aryaputra! How shall the creed of Brihaspati, based only on Experience, stand before the diverse other creeds, based on several Authorities, which establish the existence of several inferential entities." ? 
Mahamoha. My love! Surely thou seemest to put this question, just to strengthen the soundness of our faith! 
48. These Védas, simply believed in by 
1. Followers of the Upanishads. 
2. 
God and soul. 
300 
some self-styled Pandits, seem to preach a something unreal, but this creed of Brihaspati is no sooner advocated, than they (the Vedas) lose all their force and stand stupified in silence. 
Could even myriad reflected images of the Sun form themselves into a real Sun ? 
Durmati. -Aryaputra! Before this paramount faith propounded by Brihaspati, what is Mukti, what is enjoyment and what is God? 
Mahamoha. Just hearken. 
49. The dissolution of body is Mukti; superb sexual pleasure is enjoyment; and damsels giving this pleasure and adorned with youth are the gods. 
And so it is, my queen, who knoweth the truth of truths! These, thy questions, have been replied to in consonance with Experience. 
The grace of these visible gods is the one thing to be sought after, for conquering our foe in the person of Viveka.301 
Durmeti.-May thou receive the grace of these damsels-living gods, and fit to be conversel with. But how is it possible to conquer Vivêka, through their grace? Mahamoha. Thus surely 
50. The Yoga of even the men, intent on deep penance,-men who have mastered all the Vedas and who have restrained the senses outer and inner, the picture in the shape of slender-waisted damsels, painted on the walls-Imagination, even without the aid of the artist's brush, shall undo. 
The Vedantins state that even those dear to the Supreme Lord on account of their aversion to sense-enjoyments refrain not from pleasures but indulge in diverse pleasures, eating, drinking, sporting with women, riding on carriages, etc, and this is the great virtue (of our faith). Indeed none would fly from the fear of the scorpion to the mouth of the dragon. 
Further :- 
51. Breatheth there the man who faileth 
302 
not in courage, even at the sight of damsels, who are shaped together with the collected materials of darkness,' the moon," flower-bunch, the sky', the eddy," the 
6 
7 
plantain-tree, the mirror, the quiver," and the lotus',-damsels who resemble the waving pennons, implanted in the front of Cupid's hosts ? 
Ha! Ha!! Quoth not the Vedasthat many are the wives of Garuda, brooking not a moment's separation from him, as also of the other eternal lovers of Vaikuntha who are ever free from family-ties? Quoth not again the Srutis that the Supreme Lord who liberateth men from all samsara is the spouse of no less than three wives, Sri, Bhû and Nilā? Therefore the monkeylike revilers of Kāma-the true aim of life, 
1. Hair. 
2. Face. 
6. Thighs. 
7. Kneс. 
8. Shank 
3. Breasts. 
4. Waist. 
5. 
Navel. 
9. Foot. 
Tho hoad to foot description of a damsel ismeant here. 
303 
burn their own fingers, like one setting ones own city in flames when trying to burn the city of ones foe. 
Behold Him whom the Mumukshus proclain as the Donor of Eternal Bliss! 
52. Even the Ancient Lord, though promulgating Satva-guna, diverteth Himself in several chief cities with several wives, reposing Himself on His thousand-hooded Sesha-couch. 
Therefore refuting the Chārvāka's faith and premising the existence of the Divine Couple is as ludicrous as the wit of a simpleton who would refuse to give a hundred but would offer only a five-score ! 
Further:- 
53. The vow of celibacy suffered by Brahmos and others who have compiled works relating to the attainment of salva- 
1. See n. 5, p. 29. 
3 
The Lord without an origin, Sri-Narayang. Such as Srirangam, etc. 
4. Also meass-In the company of gallants 
304 
tion, but which are fit to be believed only by fools, maketh after all for greater enjoyment. 
(Listening):- 
What sayeth some one? 
54. "The wedded life of the Parents' of the Universe is natural2 and is the outcome of their free volition. Even the division of human beings into men and women is only designed for the service of the First Couple'. Every other design is also to be similarly interpreted. Brihaspati's faith merely enhanceth the pleasures of temporal men but it hath no relish to the really learned men, alas!" 
(Frowning). Who is there? Let this owl of a Believer be thrust away from my 
ken. 
Dormati.Aryaputra! Surely my votaries are all women. I am really proud that Viveka is to be conquered through them. 
1. Sri and the Lord of Sri. 
2 
Not due to the force of Karma. 
(Musing). 
305 
How is it that the world, neglecting thy creed, the main theory of which is flirting with young damsels, bankereth after diverse different creeds? 
Mahamoha.My dear! Want of proper investigation is the cause of this blind obstinacy of the fiendish Believers. 
55. People, eager to indulge in vain quibbling arguments, thus abandoning the faultless faith propounded by Brihaspati, set their hearts on diverse other ereeds established by Kapila, Hiranyagarbha, Kānāda, Buddha, Jina and others. 
56. Both movable and immovable objects are wondrous by nature, like the variegated hues of the peacock's plumage. Need poets assign any reason for the thorn being sharp? 
Such is the indomitable force of the theory of nature. The law of cause and ffect also followeth the Kika-taliya-nykya." 
1 The mam of the word the pain k 16 Aik ( takes its origin from the unexpected and sudden 
4. 8. 20 
. 
306 
Even thus:- 
57. Ah! How loud in the world, flourish systems of sophistry, by the hundred, sharp as shingle, agitating the world by the legerdemain of befangled controversies, raging by "No"s pitted against "Yes", and "Yes "s against "No"s ! 
58. Virôchana', taught by the all-know ing Prajapati who was pleased with his longservice to him, promulgated for mankind the quintessence of the Asurôpanishat Even in this matter- 
59. Mukti, it was said, by the elders to be the annihilation of the body and the senses. But considering this as absurd, I composed 
crow 
fall of a palm-fruit upon the head of a (so as to kill it) at the very moment of its sitting on a branch of that tree and is used to denote a very unexpected and accidental occurrence. but not a linked cause and effect. 
1: The progenitor of the Asuras, father of Bali. 2. cf. इन्द्रो ह वै देवानामनुप्रवत्राज विरोचनोऽसुराणाम् । 
(Chandogya Upanishad.) 
307 
a treatise, therein stating that both by largeness' (Brahman), and glory' (Brahman) 
the bulging bosoms of damsels matched Brahma-bliss. 
Durmati.--Aryaputra! This mortal world being so well protected by thee, how is it that our unreasonable foes, with their partiality to other faiths, torment it? 
Mahamoha... Be they what they would! It harmeth us not. Thieves abandon not their nature, but the wary-minded are in no way affected by these. 
60. Let the Védāntins indulge in mockery against us as they please. Let others, indifferent, desire to despise us--great in every way; let yet others prattle their own wits by saying that this is the attitude of the virtuous. Of what avait to us are all these ways of self-conceited perverts? 
The necessary attribute of Brahman, Lit Large- 
nesa. 
सौन्दर्य super beauty), ऐर्ये (supremroy) eto. 
308 
(Musing). Love mine! Now we must find out the men who are capable of establishing our theory. 
Who there? 
(Dambha and others advancing quickly) Here we are. (Thus saying, approach.) 
Mahamoha. Welcome to you-the well-wishers 
!of our race. 
Dambha and Darpa.-(With humility) 
Great king! We are here, our movement always everywhere and unrestrained, by thy grace. What may by these servants of thine be done.? 
Mahamoha.What news then about Kāma and 
others? 
Dambha.(Aside). What shall I say to the 
by king? 
(Aloud.) My lord 
Durmati's Lord! 
It is said "Truth shineth in kings." 1 shall therefore inform thy Majesty, what I saw, though it may be disliking to me. 
309 
For, I know too well the present condition of Kāma and Lôbha. 
61. Immersed though men are in the Ocean of myriad lusts, though the season of Spring reigneth, though the Malayà breezes blow, Kāma, abashed, as it were, at reverses', due to his slight remissness (in attacking the Jiva), it seems, hath fallen into slumber, and never toucheth his shafts! 
What need then to speak of the other (Lobha) ? 
Listen :- 
62. What hold can Lobha, an object of praise by misers, obtain in a Jiva, beguiled as he is by Viveka, and who neglects his very body!? 
Darpa. - My Lord, Wise in the company of 
Durmati! I have seen Krodha in his 
present plight; I shall acquaint thee with 
1. Failure of the plan to captivate Jiva and make him enjoy the dictates of senses when bis mind is distracted from Yoga. 
Also means, expert in base wit. 
310 
what I saw, in deference to the precept"By Truth shall the Wise be followed. 
63. Even Krôdha-the enhancer of the happiness of veteran warriors, whose prowess is manifest in the knitting of his eyebrow-premonitory of the coming cataclysm, destroying the cosmos of the twiceseven worlds, remaineth all stupified by the influence of the poisonous drug, Virakti. 
Mabamoha.-(With a Sardonic laugh.) Ah! 
These are the evil counsels of the ruiner of our race, Viveka. All wary then, we must cover the whole universe with vice, in such a way that there could be no opportunity for Vivêka. Vice alone is virtue for us, who are intent on preserving our race. The Ithasins' aver :-Virtue and Vice alternate according to individual situations." Viveka, by himself not very strong, thus reduced to straits, shall easily surrender. After all, what is this Vivêka ? It is certainly no hard task for the sickle to cut the herb, 
1. Epic-writers. 
2. Ophiorrhira mungo.311 
nor doth the fire need help to burn the thorn! 
(Musing) Love mine! My race's guardian angel! Mark the studied perseverance (in me, not leaving a thing begun, nto the limit of life) and ever true to thy wishes! 
64. Either let Kāma pine with Kródha and Lobha, or join me in time. Sri Rāma's irresistable stand in his fight with the Rakshasas, I shall re-enact in my fight with Viveka. This Kali-age shall be my chariot, thou Duruati my charioteer, Dambha be my triumphal trumpet and Darpa my armour! 
Dambha. Great king! When thy success dependeth entirely upon thyself, what availeth our effort? 
65. Who dare stand before thee, when thon takest it into thy head to romp on the stage of war, and who as thy foe dare challenge thee when thou amusest thyself in Kāma-katra? A person but one earnestly 
312 
espied by thee becometh capable of pulverising the earth', uplifting the Mountain Kailāsa and exsiccating the Oceans Seven. 
Still, we, acting under thy commands, shall put ourselves unreservedly at thy disposal and exert our very best. Even monkeys did assist Sri Rama and so did the shepherd women. Sri Krishna. 
Mahamoha. I shall allot ye duties exactly as 
your hearts may desire. 
66. Now Dambha! Thou shalt in all vigilance again resort to regious bordering on holy rivers to continue thy duties, and Darpa shall take his residence in 
1. The reference is to Parasurama who in auger powdered the Earth. 
2. 
3. 
to Ravana who uplifted Kailasa 
when he went to fight with Sive. 
to Agastya who drank the 
oceans in anger. 
4. Where sacrifices are performed, there vanity 
(Dambha) is manifest. 
313 
the holy hermitages, where the conceit of Vairagya is in full evidence. 
Dambha and Darpa.-Thy Majesty's command 
shall be obeyed. 
(Exeunt.) 
(Aside.) What shall be done first to baffle the enemy? Ah, now I recollect. 
67. Helped by Durmati, I shall fling into the burning belly-fire, the four' kinds of oblations and shall solely maintain Pranagnihotra. 
Then, when the Jiva revelleth himself in feasting on dainty dishes, made of stuffs, wholesome and at the same time forbidden by canons related to caste", person' and place", where is the least chance to Viveka's victory P 
68. (Aloud,)-If I defeat not Viveka, of what use are they to me,-clusters of Meru mountains, ranges of Kailasa mountains, 
1. खाद्य, पेय, चूष्य, लेय. 
The only fire sacrifice of keeping up ble 
3 Onions, etc 
Stuff belonging to out-cases 
5. Stuff grown in filthy places etc. 
314 
the thrice-six islands, or all the worlds ? Contented I shall never be, even with all the Cosmos entire. Now therefore my mind yearneth to kill the enemy. 
Durmati. Thy ministers alone shall be favored by entrusting them with the errand to slaughter the foe. 
Mahamoha.Love mine! Rightly thou dost discriminate. In similar strain was the thought in my mind. Therefore let some confidant of ours be summoned from the harem. 
Durmati. -Friend Durvasana! Come here. 
(Then enter Durchsana.) 
Durvasana. Here I am, awaiting the king's and 
the queen's mandates, 
Mahamoha. My good Durvasana! Proclaim under my command to my different Secretaries, expert in all learning and writing:- 
Be it known to all that the King of Kings and Suzerain Lord, the great Mahàmoha with Queen Durmati commandeth :- 
315 
"Let it be written that Mahamôha hath made a free grant of the famous metropolises seven, known all the worlds over, as the seven Mukti-kshetras the great islands seven, the oceans seven, to his ministers seven, Kama, Krodha, Lôbba, Mada', Dambha, Matsarya and Stambha1." 
69. “ 
8 
And:- 
Leaving now Indra and the other Devas, who retire from their high estates at each successive Manvantara", and who tremble with fear at the very mention of my name, all this universe shall interpret the use of the words --Nama, Seast, Srāha, Sradha, uttered even casually, as appertaining to myself-Mahàmôha." 
Shrices of Salvation. 
3. Jealousy. 
The period or age of a Manu. 
2. Pride. 
4. Confusion. 
6. These are the words with which Vedic hyming 
end. 
316 
Durvasana.-Duly shall the King's and the 
Queens' commands be obeyed. 
(A cry behind the curtain.) 
66 
Victory to the Lord! 
(Exit.) 
70. "Oh, Môha great! Like unto thee is the fierce-rayed Sun, unfavorable owing to its heat' to men's movements, causing a time suitable for eating, and desiring to get into the opposite direction-West. 
71. 
Now-a cook, the servant of Durmati, both from the home of Indra', and the home of Varuna, bringeth a fit meal? made of the ingredients of sweet nectar, and wine flowing incessantly, for Mahāmôha." Mahamoha.-(Listening.) We shall now retire 
into our inner rooms, as the herald 
70. The epithets when applied to Mahāmôha mean 1. Prowess 
2 Torments of Samsara, unfavor- 
3. 
able to the attainment of Moksha. 
Midday-also means founding the Charvaka faith, 
liked by all. 4 
Longing to conquer Viveka 
5. 
Svarga. 
6. 
Western Ocean. 
7. स्वायं धारान्तं सुरा 
317 
declareth that it is time to adore the deities, who pervade all bodies and who are accepted by all religionists viz. our very lives (Prānas.) 
(Thus exeunt.) 
Finis Act V termned Dambhady upālambhana (Taunt of Dambha and others.) 
AUM. 
(183